I am unable to attend the upcoming meeting, but one of the agenda items -- "cross articulation concerns" -- seems relevant to one of the projects I have been working on. So, I thought it might be useful to post an update in the event that the cross-listing of IDEA 1240 and CRWR 1240 comes up for discussion.

On May 25 of this year, the Dean of Humanities met with Aislinn (who was representing the Creative Writing Department) and I to discuss a request that was made by the department to de-cross-list the recently approved cross-listed course IDEA 1240/CRWR 1240. The de-cross-listing was agreed upon, along with further agreements that changes would be made to both courses (so as not to overlap course content too much) and that no cross-listings with IDEA would be pursued in the future. I agreed to make the changes to IDEA 1240, with the understanding that changes to CRWR 1240 would be made by the Creative Writing Department.

On June 17, at the meeting of the Humanities Standing Committee on Curriculum (HSCC), I proposed this plan and received confirmation to go ahead. The sharing of tasks was also confirmed: I would complete the changes to IDEA 1240, the Creative Writing Department would make the changes to CRWR 1240. HSCC approval of these steps was then sent along to the Senate Subcommittee on Course Curriculum (SCC), as required, for final review.

On July 20, a joint message from Dana Cserepes, Senate Vice Chair of SCC, and Kathy Wainman, member of SCC and Manager of Registration Systems (the folks who handle cross-listing), was sent to me and to Zoe. The message indicated the exact process we were to undertake, and is as follows:

"IDEA 1240 must be revised.  Remove the cross-listing information and the note stating that students can only receive credit for one of these courses. Obviously if there are other revisions it will then be the normal process. 
 
CRWR 1240 – It is probably best to discontinue this course and develop a new course (new number) if they [the Creative Writing Department] want something similar but not identical to 1240.  
 
If they decide to keep CRWR 1240 - remove any references to the cross-listing and it is recommended that they do a significant revision so it a very different course from IDEA 1240. They should not offer this course until all the revisions are complete."

The tasks assigned to me with reference to IDEA 1240 have been completed in accordance with the requests quoted above, and I will be submitting those changes for approval at the HSCC meeting on Friday, September 16. This final step will complete my involvement with this process.

I do not know the status of the revisions on the Creative Writing side, as I have had no involvement with them. But, as I cannot be at the meeting, I did want to let everyone know that my tasks have been completed. In the event that the requested changes are not made to CRWR 1240 by September 16, the de-cross-listing of IDEA 1240 will still go ahead (as intended by everyone), but it will not take effect until after the Spring semester. Given the timeframes and meeting schedules involved, it was not possible to have the requested changes confirmed by HSCC in time for submission to SCC by September 9, which is the submission deadline if changes are to take effect for the Spring semester. So, as of September 9, even though changes will have been made to the cross-listed status of IDEA 1240 (and perhaps CRWR 1240, though as I mentioned above I have no knowledge about this), and will have been approved by HSCC, those changes will not take effect until April 2012. IDEA 1240 and CRWR 1240 will still be cross-listed for one more semester.

I hope this summary helps to clarify the situation in the event that this topic arises at the meeting. (I wasn't sure if "cross-articulation concerns" was specific to this situation, but I thought I would post this just in case you needed the details.)
