Hi Diane;

As promised, I'm following up with my reflections about yesterday's HSCC meeting.

As you know, I was invited to the HSCC meeting to answer questions about the course outline for CRWR 2140. You and I had also discussed the importance (for me) of seeing that appropriate steps had been taken to contain or curtail the kinds of actionable comments that were made (about me) at the previous HSCC meeting. So, naturally, I attended yesterday's meeting with some expectation that my concerns would be addressed and that my responses to the questions would be heard. Unfortunately, that is not what happened.

There was no discussion about process, or purview, nor any reinforcement of collegial behavior. There was no mention of any need for adjustments of process or procedure, no discussion of the norms and guidelines of the committee, and no acknowledgement that anything untoward had taken place at the previous meeting.

My presence at the meeting, and the purpose for my presence, were not acknowledged, and I was not asked to present my answers to the documented questions. When it became clear that the committee intended to review the outline without any reference to the documented questions nor my documented answers (of which you have a copy), I spoke up with a specific request to present, which was granted by the Chair.

Even so, I had no real opportunity to present my answers. After about 60 seconds I was interrupted, by a Fine Arts faculty member, with a question about whether I would be delivering a monologue. I was repeatedly interrupted about every ten seconds after that. These interruptions consistently diverted the conversation away from my responses and toward other matters chosen by the two Fine Arts faculty members who were present. All of their questions -- they weren't really questions, but rather statements -- involved either the alleged lack of rigor of the Creative Writing department or my alleged lack of rigor or expertise. So, it seems that this situation has now moved beyond me, and now includes the entire Creative Writing department.

I did not get through my response to a single question. The Fine Arts faculty members continued to interrupt and divert at regular intervals. They were very determined that I not be able to speak, and they made a number of actionable comments about me. For example, they claimed that I advocated the abandonment of all academic standards. They also suggested that I had not taken the questions seriously. Moreover, they made several actionable comments against the entire Creative Writing department; for example, that the department is "damaging students" and that Fine Arts has to "repair the damage." (This was a reference to our work, in Creative Writing, with students who want to sell their creative products online.) It was clear that the Fine Arts faculty members had also slandered Creative Writing in their conversations with students, which makes the issue larger again.

The two Fine Arts faculty members were the only people at the meeting who acted this way. Several committee members remained completely silent throughout, a few members asked clarifying questions about the outline (which were, in every case, answered to their satisfaction in under ten seconds), and my colleagues from Creative Writing attempted (as I did) to contain the attacks. Aislinn in particular was very assertive in trying to limit the content of the discussion to the outline at hand and to discourage the Fine Arts faculty members from openly slandering Creative Writing.

But, despite the efforts of Aislinn and me (who were, after all, guests at the meeting), there was no containment of the actionable statements. No member of the committee was able (or willing) to step in and make a firm boundary about appropriate discourse. The group dynamic seemed to be one in which the Fine Arts faculty members had established, through previous meetings, that they could say whatever they wanted with impunity. As a result, perhaps a dozen actionable statements were made. It was a classic bullying environment.

Shelly did try to dampen some of the inappropriate comments made about Creative Writing (by asking people to stay focused on the outline and not other matters), but her efforts made no difference. The actionable comments continued. This group dynamic was much larger than her authority as Chair. I recognize that she was trying, but the situation was out of hand from the outset. Clearly, the history of success that Fine Arts faculty members have enjoyed in making inappropriate comments in previous meetings amounts to an endorsement of such behavior.

As the time passed we became increasingly mired in actionable and reactive circumstances. I asserted my right to answer the questions I was given but was repeatedly diverted -- with the eventual outcome, as I mentioned above, that I did not get through a single question. Eventually I decided that passing the course through the committee was more important than my right to answer the questions. So, I abandoned my responses and we focused on the course outline itself. This shift in tactics was reinforced by several people, such as Mazen, who tried to keep the committee on task.

As we moved through the outline, it became clear that a core aspect of this situation revolves around the use of the word "art." The Fine Arts faculty members asserted many times that the use of this word (and the word "artist," and all such variants) should be their sole purview. In the end, we made a few tiny changes to the outline, including the adjustment of the phrase "writer and artist" to "creative individual."

A vote was held and the course passed (the two Fine Arts faculty members voted against, as did one other member). However, in advance of the vote there was no discussion about the criteria for voting. As you know, there are only two criteria for assessing course outlines at this level: consistency with departmental plans and consistency with Kwantlen standards (which are, at Kwantlen, equivalent to departmental standards). It's clear that the votes of the Fine Arts faculty members had nothing to do with the consistency of the course outline with departmental plans and standards. It's also clear that the committee has no shared understanding of what they are voting about.

You asked me, in our last meeting together, to assess whether this HSCC meeting satisfactorily addressed my concerns. It did not. In fact, it reinforced my concerns. it has become clear that the Fine Arts faculty members at HSCC feel complete freedom to slander whomever they like and to subvert the due process of the committee. They also feel free to continue this inappropriate and corrosive behavior beyond the committee and into their conversations with students. They are not deterred by any sense of ethical obligation to collegiality (not to mention legality) and they are not stopped by anyone with the authority or facilitative skill to do so.

Also, I should mention that inappropriate comments made by the committee members from Fine Arts extended beyond the subject of Creative Writing. Near the outset of the meeting the committee discussed an agenda item related to the new degree offered by the Music department. In this brief discussion, one of the Fine Arts members suggested that the Music degree (Bachelor of Music in Musical Arts) "makes no sense" and that the degree should rather be a Bachelor of Fine Arts in Music. In these comments there was a general tone of dismissiveness about the degree and the direction, in general, of the Music department. I was only in attendance for the first part of the meeting, so I do not know if other comments were later made about other departments. All I know is that while I was in attendance the committee touched upon the work of two departments, and in each case inappropriate comments were made.

Well, there you go. That's how the meeting went: overall, rather discouraging. It's now clear that my original request -- for an apology about actionable comments made about me -- will never happen unless I undertake legal action. I'm not prepared to follow that course at this time.

If you'd like to meet again to talk about this, just let me know.

Cheers.

Ross

