Your online work seems to be evolving well. New media is a complex and rapidly-evolving area of creativity, and it takes some time to find your voice. One of the things I am enjoying about your work is the way in which you write with honesty and directness about your life and your experiences. That's a good start. In terms of moving forward, here are some suggestions:

1. Learn to define your sentences more precisely (using both punctuation and phrase order). This is a matter of practice and reading. Take some time to learn how to properly distinguish between one sentence and another. Avoid comma splices, run-ons, and sentence fragments (except under special circumstances, such as when a fragment is used for emphasis). In general, you write in a way that is similar to how you speak. This is a very common habit. It's important to remember that writing is not speech, and the forms of language used in speech do not always translate well to the written word. This situation will improve if you read more. As we were discussing in class, try to read a few good books per month -- not textbooks but literary books. The path to better writing starts with better reading.

2. Work on tightening. Take a look at my tips and suggestions for more precise composition (http://rosslaird.com/blog/tips-on-tightening/), and spend more time composing each sentence. Don't just write a sentence and move on. Instead, slow down and take your time, focusing on precisely what you wish to say.

3. Write for your audience -- but first, think about who your audience might be.

4. Develop your literary vocabulary. Again, this is mostly a matter of reading, but it's also a matter of intention. Take a look at my suggestions for how to think about language for writing (http://rosslaird.com/blog/words-and-wells/), and start to view all of your online writing as narrative poetry. The text should be spare, clean, and expressive.

Keep going.

Here's what happens now: you keep sending me compositions/posts (or links to posts), over the next six weeks or so. Send as many as you like, or send none. It's up to you. For each post that you ask me to review, I will send feedback. So, if you send 20 posts I will send 20 responses. If you send no further requests for review of posts, I will send no further feedback. You can see what I'm working toward here: engagement with the process. The more you engage, the more you get back. So, ideally I'd like to see you submit at least five requests for me to review your compositions (five is the minimum number of compositions). That way you will get the most amount of feedback on your projects and I will get the most amount of feedback about your process. Everybody wins. But the requests for feedback are entirely optional. If you just want a grade for the entire set of compositions, you will just get a grade (see below). Whatever works best for you. Send requests for feedback as often as you like. There is no set schedule (but do remember that all compositions must be completed by one week before the end of the semester).

During the last week of the semester I'd like you to submit your self-assessment of your own compositions. Take a look at page 8 of the course outline for details (if you have misplaced the outline, you can find it here: http://rosslaird.com/static/media/uploads/1240.pdf). Part of that self-assessment involves suggesting a grade for your compositions. Once I have received your suggested grade, I will send a further narrative evaluation along with a final grade for your compositions. It will either be the same or different from the grade you have suggested. If it's different I'll tell you why. (If you choose not to send a final self-assessment, I will just send you a final grade with no further feedback.)

From my point of view, grades are much less important than engagement with the creative process. So, your grade for the compositions is tied to your engagement with your compositional process and with the course. For now, you don't have a grade for the first composition (though, if you are looking for a guideline, I'd say your first composition is in the B range).

Keep reading, keep writing. There is no secret formula other than practice and passion.

If you have questions, send them along.

Cheers.

Ross
