Nature, Ecology and the Body

IDEA 2100

First offered: Summer 2014 or Fall 2014 (Weather too cold and uncertain in the spring.)

Description

Students will learn about the interconnected themes of ecology, sustainability, nature experience, creativity, and personal and academic development. They will contextualize their creative and academic inquiries by way of experiences in nature and will broaden their understanding of the relationship between humanity and the natural world.

Nature and Creativity
Nature as aesthetic experience.
Artistic and spiritual inspiration.

Nature as Mentor
Our relationship and lost connection with nature.
Impermanence and cycles (astronomical, biological, climatic, cultural, geological, mythological).
Learning to listen in the forest.

Embodiment
Running in nature.
Meditation and mindfulness.

Sustainability
Deep and social ecology.
Community engagement.
Sustainable food.


STUDENT PROJECTS/ASSESSMENT

Participation.

Written reflections.

Semester-long creative project (inspired by nature, ecology, or personal journey).

Facilitate activities on field trips.  This could be tricky, in that students would likely need to visit the field trip site prior to facilitating.  However, there are endless options for students to choose from:  bushcraft, storytelling, sit spot, nature’s grocery store, nature’s medicine cabinet, the art of animal tracking, mapping, bird language, five-minute fire, nature photography, nutrient cycles, food webs, etc).  I think we could make this work.


PROPOSED FIELD TRIPS (this is the order we do them in BIOL 2322):

1. Ecology Around the Campus

Explore the webs of connection and consider human impacts (positive and negative).

Science angle:  food webs, invasive species, nutrient cycling, plant ID.
Art angle:  patterns and symmetry, mindfulness.


2. Boundary Bay (Tides and Transitions)

Explore the in-between places, the estuary and intertidal zones.  How do organisms such as the screw snail, lugworm and ghost shrimp survive in this chaotic environment?  How do we cope during times of change?  Consider the influence of the moon.  

Science angle:  intertidal zone, biodiversity, tides and lunar cycles.
Art angle:  process and product, transitions.


3. Watershed Park (A Walk/Run in the Woods)

Explore the rich tapestry of the forest.  Listen for birdsong.  Every tree has a story to tell in its rings, leaves and symbolism.  What do they tell us?  Stand still, meditate, walk slowly, go for a run.  Experience yourself in ecological immersion.  

Science angle:  dendrochronology, bird language, forest ecology (abiotic and biotic factors, indicator species, nurse logs, adaptations, disturbances, etc).
Art angle:  folklore, mythology, aesthetic experience, creativity.


4. Cougar Creek (The River of Time)

Follow the river and be mindful the The Journey.  Water is central to life, a simple compound of hydrogen and oxygen and yet amazingly unique in its properties to sustain life.

Science angle:  limnology (biological, geological, chemical, and physical characteristics of the river), water cycle, water quality (EPT) index.
Art angle:   artistic inspiration, reflection, finding purpose.


5. Delta Nature Reserve (Bogged Down)

Burns Bog is  a globally unique ecosystem, and one of the largest undeveloped urban wilderness areas in North America.  An immense amount of carbon dioxide is trapped within this raised peat bog.  What happens when we get stuck?  How can we shift things?  

Science angle:  unique flora and fauna, carbon cycle, climate change, sustainability.
Art angle:  creativity, inspiration, personal growth.


6. Tynehead Fish Hatchery (Life and Death)

Understand how a hatchery works.  Tynehead is run entirely by volunteers.  Perhaps have the opportunity to participate in an egg take.

Science angle:  life cycle (fish), fish biology, sustainability.
Art angle:  life cycle (human), death and birth in art, connection to food.


7. Vancouver Aquarium

Explore the fantastic marine environments at the aquarium.

Science angle:  marine biology, oceanography, evolution, sustainability.
Art angle:  creative inspiration, colour and texture, movement.


Other sites to consider:  Reifel Bird Sanctuary, Serpentine Fen, Bird Banding @ Colony Farm (Saturdays only), Mountain View Conservation Centre (tours only, have unique animals both native and exotic), Campbell Valley Park, Derby Reach Park, Tynehead Park, farmer’s market, walk along power line trail near Kwantlen, have students propose a site.


BACKUP ACTIVITIES (in case of extreme weather):

1. Visit the biology lab.

2. In class activities (dialogues, reflections, preparing for group presentations, ecology games, meditation, embodiment).


RESOURCE BOOKS (obviously incomplete):

Beavington, Lee.  Common Plants of Greater Vancouver.
Emerson, Ralph Waldo.  Nature.
Krakauer, Jon.  Into the Wild.
Kroodsma, Donald.  The Singing Life of Birds: The Art and Science of Listening to Bird Song.
Laird, Ross.  A Stone’s Throw.
Louv, Richard.  Last Child in the Woods: Saving Our Children from Nature-Deficit Disorder.
Pojar, Jim & Mackinnon, Andy.  Plants of Coastal British Columbia.
Thoreau, Henry David.  Walden.
Young, Jon, Ellen Haas, & Evan McGown. Coyote's Guide to Connecting with Nature. 
