October 18: Meeting with Josh and Jody to discuss student support for FoE

October 19: Followup from Josh:

"Some quick follow-up on our meeting yesterday afternoon. I believe you had mentioned that 2 of the students could participate on a dimension committee (if it is all 3, please let me know). Could you please forward the first and last names of those 2 students so that we can add them to the Learning Committee? If the 3rd student is also available to participate in a committee, we are also looking for student representation on the Philosophy Committee.
 
Building on the discussion around other kinds of support that these students might be able to provide for the process; we’re still hopeful that they can serve on the Steering Committee. In addition to that, however, I really like the direction that yesterday’s conversation was headed in terms of items like: developing or maintaining a blog or website, promotion of the FoE process (particularly for survey participation), and also perhaps items like student interviews around campus – items that can help to build the qualitative side of the self-study process."


November 3:

Meeting with Josh, Christine, Sheridan, Tierney


November 10:

FoE Steering Committee meeting; student participation discussed and approved.
Jennifer sends photo waiver form to me, and I upload it to Teambox.

In various emails, Jody says:

"We have engaged several students to collect stories, through video, of our students discussing their experiences.  If you are willing to participate in this project please let me know and I will put the students in touch with you via your Kwantlen.net email.  They will set up a time to interview you when you are on campus.  It should not take more than 10 minutes of your time."
 
November 14, Meg contacts Ariana to ask about the process:

"I am working with one of the Foundations of Excellence task groups (Learning) and we have some student members who would like to conduct some focus groups with first year students on several different campuses. I remember your excellent support when we wanted some feedback on our learning management system theme design and I wondered if you had any resources/advice/assistance you could offers these students in setting up and conducting these focus groups. It would be great if there were some kind of kit or handbook available for conducting things like this. Probably other groups are wanting to do similar things."

November 15, Ariana sends feedback to Meg about the process. Meg forwards this to me.



November 23, Christine posts on Teambox:

"We are currently reading a book that was recommended on running a focus group. Should be fun and exciting....and a new learning opportunity for both Sheridan and I. We're going to do 2-3 focus groups each comprised of 5-7 students(probably 5 is better I think). I'm going to have to control my overzealous ways and not talk....because when the moderator(s) talk the focus group flops.

Jody has some funding for us. We'll be able to offer participating students a $20 gift card to the book store. We now have a fairly decent list of students that are participating and Kurt Penner is going to put out a request to the first year students that attended orientation.

Faith Auton-Cuff gave us a wonderful list of focus question to start working with. We are currently coming up with probes and additional questions. Meg has the camera equipment for us for Monday am....and we're going to start filming."

Carolyn Robertson, David Wiens, Ron Maggiore, Jennifer MacArthur

Feb. 10, 2012: Steering Committee meeting; video shown
Feb. 10-16: emails including Jason Dyer, me, and FoE Learning Committee
Feb. 16, 2012: Meeting with Jason Dyer (email threads)

