FoE Recommedations

Make excellence in engagement integral to the teaching culture (High priority)

We recommend that the faculty culture be encouraged to develop and promote standards and practices of excellence in engagement. No such standards currently exist at Kwantlen, though some faculty members do implement various practices of engagement.

Include students in the implementation and evaluation of engagement practices (High priority)

Faculty members tend to evaluate their teaching practices based on content delivery and pedagogical models. They do not typically ask students to evaluate course engagement. Consequently, the stakeholders who are in a unique position to evaluate engagement are not part of the evaluative process. (Course evaluations do not currently server any real-world purpose at Kwantlen in terms of professional development or the promotion of engagement.) 

We recommend that students be more involved in the implementation and evaluation of engagement in the classroom.

Align teaching/learning activities with assessment and intended outcomes (High priority)

We recommend that Kwanlten align intended learning outcomes with teaching/learning activities likely to foster those outcomes, and also align the assessment of students' actual learning outcomes with those that are intended.

Integrate outcomes with student engagement (High priority)

We recommend that Kwantlen recognize the essential connection between the achievement of intended learning outcomes and student engagement. Currently, our outcomes are based on what faculty and administration believe students should learn; we have not involved students in any way in the development of learning outcomes or learning activities. This approach corrodes student motivation and engagement. Furthermore, faculty and administrative knowledge about the changing social, educational, and professional landscape is often out of step with the reality of what students need. Therefore, we recommend that students be more involved in the development of their learning activities and outcomes.


Develop outcomes-based, engagement-focused curriculum (High priority)

We recommend that engagement-focused curriculum be developed (for the first-year and beyond) as a means of integrating outcomes with engagement. This curriculum should be taught by faculty with specific expertise in student engagement, motivation, and mentorship.

Revision the outcomes development process (High priority)

The role of outcomes in the curriculum development process is in need of revision, as noted in the main text above.

Open a conversation about Open Access (High priority)

We propose a broad and serious conversation around the concept of "open access" with respect to whom it serves and whom it doesn't, consequences both intended and unintended, general trends in higher education, and relevance to our new mission and mandate.

Further develop initiatives focused on the first-year experience (High priority)

Strategies to improve the first-year experience might include a vibrant program of professional development centered around teaching excellence, workshops and seminars on teaching strategies for first year classes, recognition for innovation and excellence in the first year, etc.


Create pathways of success for students (High priority)

Kwantlen needs to share information with students regarding the degree of commitment necessary to succeed at Kwantlen, and how that external pressures will take away from the required academic achievement. Expectations of completing a four-year degree in four years are not realistic for the vast majority of students at Kwantlen. Furthermore, students need to be made aware of the amount of work involved prior to enrolling for five classes (15 credits) in their first semester. Students should be required to see an Advisor prior to registering in five classes first semester.

These types initiatives should be embedded into specific, required programming for the first-year (curricular and co-curricular).


Expand peer mentorship and institutional mentorship (High priority)

First-year students should be offered the opportunity of having a peer mentor who can assist them in navigating the complexities of the institution. It would also be good to have an integrated system between advising, counselling, and the Learning Centre that provides advice and planning for students and perhaps in a more proactive way. Systems like the Early Alert are a good example of this idea.

Adapt the learning environment to stream students for success (High priority)

Programs need to be more proactive in the support of students through their first year so that it is possible to identify struggling students early on, direct them to the resources they need, and support them through their transition to academic success. Existing programs need to be augmented so that underprepared students can make the necessary progress, and so that stronger students can excel.

Create a single, centralized assessment system (High priority)

Such a system would facilitate greater efficiency, service delivery, and engagement with students.

Develop a pre-enrollment placement program (High priority)

We recommend that Kwantlen reach out (as early as possible) to prospective students to ensure that they are ready for post-secondary, and are placed in a program where they have a realistic chance of success (this would also apply to particularly gifted students - to ensure they are placed in a program which challenges them sufficiently to keep them interested).

Educate the community about the importance of appropriate placement (High priority)

We recommend that Kwantlen educate all stakeholders about the core purpose and pillars of of Kwantlen's open access policy. Stakeholders need to be aware that first-year experiences, learning goals, assessments, and appropriate placement are critically important to post-secondary success.

Assess the impact of special learning opportunities (High priority)

We recommend that Kwantlen formally assess the impact of special learning opportunities by gathering measurable quantitative data rather than just how "satisfied" students are with programs. We need to collect data from before and after implementing learning opportunities for students. Criteria could include GPA, involvement, retention, how well Kwantlen grads meet labour market demands, and work placement success after graduation.

Adopt a co-curricular transcript (High priority)

A co-curricular transcript would give official sanction to a student's involvement in campus activities such as leadership positions, awards, workshops, or volunteer work.


Develop online self-assessment tools for special learning opportunities (High priority)

We recommend that Kwantlen develop online self-assessment tools that students can use to understand their own knowledge, values and strengths -- before and after learning opportunities have taken place. This would allow students to reflect on their activities, which would in turn foster meaningful learning and engagement.

Develop a broad-based admission process (High priority)

We recommend that Kwantlen consider the use of broad-based admissions - an application process based both on grades and personal experiences - for all applicants of direct-entry undergraduate programs. The non-academic profile questions give applicants the opportunity to talk about their learning, experiences, and goals. This encourage students to be reflective about the experiences and challenges they have faced, and it encourages them to have a greater perspective on what experiences they would want to pursue in university.

Kwantlen needs to better understand the needs and interests of first-year students, so that we can deliver successful in-class and out-of-class learning activities. A broad-based admissions process would help us to achieve this. Moreover, such a process would encourage application from prospective students who will engage in the life of the university and who recognize that university is about so much more than getting a degree.

Review and update learning goals (High priority)

Our learning goals have not been updated since 1997. In order to further develop our new identity and to serve our students (better), we need to review and re-evaluate our learning goals. We also need to explore and develop shared values about what our learning goals should reflect about our community and what they demand of us as mentors in the context of personal and professional development.

Develop learning goals for first year students (High priority)

At the moment we have no learning goals specific to first-year students, who bring unique needs and challenges to Kwantlen. If we wish to encourage greater retention and engagement among first-year students, we will need to develop new curriculum that is consistent with our mission, our vision, and our sense of what first-year students need.

Develop a clear strategy for effective use of technology in engaging students in learning (High priority)

Learning technologies will be (and already are, to some extent) foundational to post-secondary learning. We recommend that Kwantlen develop and implement an integrated and coordinated strategy to deal with this aspect of the evolution of scholarship and teaching.


Encourage greater faculty collaboration, recognition, and mutual support (High priority)

We recommend that the faculty culture be encouraged to explore various means of collaboration and mutual support. For example, one strategy might be to create a web presence for robust faculty profiles and bios that would showcase awards, distinctions, presentations and the like. Such a web presence could be used to document instructional methods and innovations and to help evaluate effectiveness in engaging students.

Increase recognition of excellence (Medium priority)

Recognition of excellence is a key feature of innovative and engaging institutions. We recommend that Kwantlen expand the scope of nomination/awards and also include other teaching awards beyond the institution (ie, mentors in professional associations, etc.). Another strategy might be to create a space at the bookstore or library where faculty and student publications, videos, websites, etc. are featured.
