The Kwantlen community has chosen a path of renewal and innovation. We've crafted a Mission and Mandate that defines our emerging identity as "a leader in innovative and interdisciplinary education." We've built a Vision that looks toward a future for Kwantlen in which "innovative, transformative, and ambitious" principles are foundational. We now seek ways of manifesting these principles in practices which integrate, for our students, "personal, academic, and professional inquiry" and which encourage, for faculty, the development of "new teaching interests and methodologies."

We've made ambitious commitments, as we should. We've started to shape an environment which supports "emerging and experimental teaching methods" and an environment that is "collaborative, innovative, creative, and respectful." We know where we want to go. Or at least we seem to.

But how do we get there? Innovation is challenging, and requires purposeful, consistent engagement at every turn. Moreover, how do we follow a path of innovation and renewal while still being mindful about the needs of our students -- especially in a post-secondary environment under increasing pressure from economic, social, and technological factors?

When the Learning Committee examined  -- honestly and candidly -- our capacities, strengths, and challenges, we recognized that we could, and should, be doing a much better job of encouraging and facilitating student engagement, pedagogical innovation, and institutional evolution. Most crucially, we need to serve our students (all of our students, not just those in first-year) with a much greater degree of support, encouragement, and mentorship. After all, we have defined our community as one that is "based on mentorship, discovery, purposefulness, and learner autonomy." In such an environment, 40 percent of the students should not be leaving after a year or less.

One of the challenges that emerged as a consistent theme in our conversations was that of institutional identity. Although Kwantlen has articulated a new and vibrant identity in Mission and Vision documents, we have not yet achieved consensus, on the ground, about what kind of an institution we want to be. This theme is amplified by what appears to be a lack of engagement, on many levels, and a lack of clarity regarding how to proceed.

One concrete example of this challenge involves the absence of support for instructors who are especially good at teaching first-year. Because Kwantlen has not developed a firm identity nor a consolidated approach to the first-year experience, instructors who are particularly adept at facilitating first-year engagement do not have any kind of mandate to do so, nor any formal support in developing programming or curriculum.

A second example involves our approach to helping students make the transition from high school. We have articulated a firm set of values regarding access (our Mission statement specifically mentions transitions programs and "access to education as the pathway to citizenship"); but we do not offer students much support in navigating the complexities of their transition toward post-secondary learning. We could do much more to facilitate pathways forward.

These examples illustrate the general theme of our own transitions as an institution and they highlight the challenges we face in finding our own pathways forward. We cannot forge such pathways until we explore, much more deeply than we have done so far, the basic question of what kind of a learning institution we wish to be.

In the absence of such clarity, our learning goals are (understandably) not as clear or effective as they might be. Our shared perspective on co-curriculuar and community-focused events has not been clarified, and therefore such practices are not widely encouraged or supported (though much effort nonetheless is undertaken by various members of the community).

Our lack of clarity about how best to provide student support leads, unavoidably, to challenges in how to balance the academic services we provide with the interpersonal assistance students require (helping students deal with stress, for example). This situation is exacerbated by our difficulties with appropriate assessment and streaming for the vast majority of students who arrive unprepared.

All of these challenges reflect the fact that we have not determined (beyond the Mission and Vision documents, which are aspirational and not yet embedded into our culture) our basic identity and our fundamental approach to learning. Accordingly, we have not yet tackled the pervasive problem of high failure rates in specific courses and high dropout rates in the first-year. We don't provide much in the way of curriculum specifically tailored to first-year students (who have a multitude of special requirements: cultural, economic, familial, academic), nor do we formally offer the kinds of mentorship to students that our Mission and Vision documents describe. (Such mentorship does take place but is typically limited to individual efforts. Innovate initiatives and teaching practices can be also be found scattered throughout the institution; but again, these tend to be limited to the efforts of individuals and small groups.)

We believe that the faculty community could provide more and better mentorship to students. Such an approach would encourage students to be more engaged, would reduce their anxiety, and would increase their performance. We believe that articulated first-year learning goals and courses should be developed and implemented by faculty who demonstrate an awareness of the specific mentorship needs of first-year students. Such programming should begin even before students arrive at the institution.

Our students already seek the most engaging instructors. However, at the moment, many students choose courses based on solely on engagement from instructors. Obviously this is not always an approach that supports the best or deepest learning. But there is an opportunity here also: perhaps our instructors who are most focused on mentorship and engagement should teach a greater share of first-year curriculum. Such an approach would make sense if we decide, as an institution, that engagement and mentorship and foundational to our practice.

The question of instructional quality is delicate, and fraught with collegial and organizational issues. But, in our view, this question should be explored in greater depth. We need to teach well, and we need to share values about what that means and how to do it.

The development of a culture of excellence in teaching would provide us with a means of navigating many of our challenges. It would encourage, for example, pride in our position on access, motivation for purposeful first-year experiences, and confidence in our institutional mandate. Our unprepared or under-prepared students (more than 80 percent, at the moment) would be served better and would perform better.

Our committee wonders about Kwantlen's ethical obligation to students. How can we continue to admit so many unprepared students yet not provide for them sufficient resources and pathways? What is our ethical obligation on the continuum between revenue generation and service quality? If Kwantlen's identity as an institution were more firmly established this question would be more straightforward to answer: we would know whether open access and support of under-prepared students were foundational to our purpose. At the moment, and in the absence of any widely shared perspective on issues such as these, this situation is simply a troubling ethical dilemma. Should we discontinue open access and disallow unprepared students (and become a traditional, academic university focused solely on academic performance); or should we hold fast to the foundational principle of access articulated in our Mission (and be true to our roots as well as the realities of our current educational climate)? How do we decide which of these paths to choose? Probably they are mutually exclusive. No one knows how to figure this out. Our view, on the Learning Committee, is that at least we should start to talk about it.

Beyond the question of institutional identity, the overall theme of our discussions in the Learning Committee was that of student support, encouragement, streaming, and mentorship. These two considerations (institutional identity and student support) obviously reflect one another, and the resolution of one would immeasurably assist the other. For example, greater and more mindful scaffolding for first-year students (mentorship before the first semester; curriculum for first-year; early alert programming; ongoing peer and faculty mentorship) would arise naturally from an institutional identity based on learning and engagement. The Learning Centre (which students consistently report as being effective) would become a greater commons and community hub. Parents would be more involved in transitions programs. Peer and faculty mentors would seek mentorship training as part of their normal professional development. Faculty who demonstrate aptitude for engagement and mentorship would be supported in developing and delivering first-year curriculum (and curriculum beyond first-year). Co-curricular activities would integrate seamlessly with the classroom and would be valued as much as academic work. Instructors would lecture less and facilitate more. Students would engage more and drop out less.

This kind of environment sounds a great deal like the Kwantlen of our Mission and Vision, but not much like the Kwantlen of our daily lives. And that's the crux; we're not there yet. We haven't decided whether these are the kinds of things we authentically want to do -- beyond what the documents claim.

These collective dilemmas are the growing pains of our institution. They are, finally, about one theme: identity. That theme manifests in a multitude of ways, as is reflected in the many recommendations of the Learning Committee.

We also recognize that wholesale change is hard, and must be managed and promoted effectively. If our emerging identity moves us in the direction of innovation, we need to be mindful about how to support that innovation without invoking undue stress or (further) fracturing. Contemporary research about innovation shows that successful innovation initiatives typically incorporate the following elements:

A small, focused, intentional, collaborative team

An environment of collegial support and professional development (a "sandbox")

A mindful, clear, and purposeful plan

Defined and measurable outcomes

Small, testable, experimental changes

Diffusion of successful changes to the wider community

Slow and careful cultural change within the organization

We propose this framework of innovation as a means of addressing the issues described in our report. The work of a small, focused, collaborative team (drawn from faculty and community members who already embody the changes we want to see) would be the most effective means of developing a mindful, clear, and purposeful plan to develop innovative curriculum and teaching practices for greater student engagement, purposefulness, discovery, and learner autonomy. That team could then help spread innovation throughout the community of Kwantlen.

In our view, slow and careful cultural change -- by way of example and opportunity -- is the best way to help Kwantlen move toward a more secure and purposeful identity. Our recommendations should be viewed in this light: not as prescriptive corrections but rather as opportunities to develop an authentically new spirit of inquiry and to forge a purposeful path forward.

