Develop a culture of teaching and learning based on excellence in student engagement.

The faculty culture should be encouraged to develop and promote standards and practices of excellence in engagement. No such standards currently exist at Kwantlen, though some faculty members do implement various practices of engagement.

Include students in the implementation and evaluation of engagement practices.

Faculty members tend to evaluate their teaching practices based on content delivery and pedagogical models. They do not typically ask students to evaluate course engagement. Consequently, the stakeholders who are in a unique position to evaluate engagement are not part of the evaluative process. (Course evaluations do not currently server any real-world purpose at Kwantlen in terms of professional development or the promotion of engagement.) 

Align teaching and learning activities with assessment and intended outcomes, and integrate outcomes with student engagement.

It would be helpful to work on aligning our intended learning outcomes (what our course outlines say) with teaching and learning activities (what we actually do). Along the sane lines, we might wish to examine the relationship between students' actual learning outcomes and those that are intended. Recognizing the essential connection between the achievement of intended learning outcomes and student engagement would be a strong step forward. Currently, our outcomes are based on what faculty and administration believe students should learn; we have not involved students in any way in the development of learning outcomes or learning activities. This approach can have the unintended consequence of corroding student motivation and engagement. Furthermore, faculty and administrative knowledge about the changing social, educational, and professional landscape can sometimes be out of step with the reality of what students need. Therefore, students should be more involved in the development of their learning activities and outcomes.


Develop outcomes-based, engagement-focused curriculum.

Engagement-focused curriculum should be developed (for the first-year and beyond) as a means of integrating outcomes with engagement. This curriculum should be taught by faculty with specific expertise in student engagement, motivation, and mentorship.


Revise the outcomes development process (course outlines and learning goals).

Our learning goals have not been updated since 1997. In order to further develop our new identity and to serve our students (better), we need to review and re-evaluate our learning goals. We also need to explore and develop shared values about what our learning goals should reflect about our community and what they demand of us as mentors in the context of personal and professional development.


Develop specific learning goals for first year students.

At the moment we have no learning goals specific to first-year students, who bring unique needs and challenges to the Faculty of Arts. If we wish to encourage greater retention and engagement among first-year students, we will need to develop new curriculum that is consistent with our mission, our vision, and our sense of what first-year students need.

Develop curricular initiatives focused on the first-year experience.

Strategies to improve the first-year experience might include a vibrant program of professional development centered around teaching excellence, workshops and seminars on teaching strategies for first year classes, recognition for innovation and excellence in the first year, etc.

Expand peer mentorship and institutional mentorship.

First-year students should be offered a peer mentor who can assist them in navigating the complexities of the institution. It would also be good to have an integrated system between advising, counselling, and the Learning Centre that provides advice and planning for students and perhaps in a more proactive way.

Develop a pre-enrollment placement program.

 Our program delivery would be enhanced greatly if we were to reach out (as early as possible) to prospective students to ensure that they are ready for post-secondary learning and are placed in a program where they have a realistic chance of success (this would also apply to particularly gifted students - to ensure they are placed in a program which challenges them sufficiently to keep them interested).

Further develop special learning opportunities (beyond the classroom).

Assessing the impact of special learning opportunities would help us to gather measurable, quantitative data rather than just how "satisfied" students are with programs. We need to collect data from before and after implementing learning opportunities for students. Criteria could include GPA, involvement, retention, how well Kwantlen grads meet labour market demands, and work placement success after graduation.

Adopt a co-curricular transcript.

A co-curricular transcript would give official sanction to a student's involvement in campus activities such as leadership positions, awards, workshops, or volunteer work.

Develop a clear strategy for effective use of technology in engaging students in learning, and facilitate faculty professional development in best practices for teaching and learning with technology.

Learning technologies will be (and already are, to some extent) foundational to post-secondary learning. We would benefit greatly from an integrated and coordinated strategy to deal with this aspect of the evolution of scholarship and teaching.

Facilitate faculty professional development in best practices for facilitation and mentorship.

The engaged classroom does not just happen, and is not just about strategies. It is, rather, a set of facilitation and mentorship skills that need to be developed over time and with much practice. We should encourage faculty to develop these skills, provide pathways for them to do so, and support their explorations and innovations.

Encourage greater faculty collaboration, recognition, and mutual support.

Faculty culture would benefit from encouragement to explore various means of collaboration and mutual support (including interdisciplinary collaboration among faculty and students).
