Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

Program Concept 


Bachelor of Arts, 
Interdisciplinary Arts 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

A. Originating Group 
1. Internal Developers 
Originating Developers: 
Dana Cserepes Department of Visual Arts 
Sibeal Foyle Department of Visual Arts 
Don Hlus Department of Music 
Ross Laird Department of Creative Writing 
Jocelyn Lymburner Department of Psychology 


Lead Developer: 

Ross Laird 
Department of Creative Writing 
Department of Learning Communities 
Department of Applied Communications 

Development Consultants: 
Rick Cuff Centre for Design & Communications 
Rob Fleming Associate Vice-President, Academic 
Sarah Hickinbottom Chair, Department of Learning Communities 
Larissa Petrillo Department of Anthropology 
Paul Tyndall Department of English 
Zena Mitchell Registrar Services 
Mary Jane Stenberg Executive Director, External Relations 
Newton Wainman Department of Academic and Career Preparation 

Dean: 
Mazen Guirguis 
Date: October, 2009 


B. Basic Information 
1. Name of proposed program 
Bachelor of Arts, Interdisciplinary Arts Major 

2. Proposed credential to be granted 
Bachelor of Arts 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

3. Expected length of program (in years) 
Four 

4. Anticipated start date of program 
January, 2011 

5. Is this a cohort, selective entry, or open access program? 
Yes. Selective entry for admission purposes. 

1. How many learners would you expect to enroll in each year of the program? 
Year One: 35 
Year Two: 35 
Year Three: 35 
Year Four: 35 



Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

C. Executive Summary 
1. Explain how this concept adheres to principles and priorities as indicated in ministerial, 
institutional, and academic planning documents. Is this concept supportable and 
sustainable with existing and/or available resources? 
Kwantlen is British Columbia’s Polytechnic University. The integration of the terms 
Polytechnic and University in our title re!ects our unique mandate, mission, and 
character as a post-secondary institution. Poly is a Greek word meaning many or much. 
Technic is also Greek, and refers to art (including the art of science). University is an 
ancient Italian (Roman) word meaning all together, or whole. 

Many arts comprising one whole. This is how we have been de"ned, and who we are 
becoming. 

With our new university status as a foundation, the Kwantlen community intends to 
strengthen its leadership in polytechnic education. This entails a greater integration of 
career preparation with learning in the arts and sciences. One of the pillars of our 
emerging mission and mandate is to increase, “over the next "ve years, our program 
offerings” to be “increasingly consistent with our polytechnic mandate.” 

This program proposal, for a Bachelor of Arts in Interdisciplinary Arts, embodies the 
core values and vision of Kwantlen’s emerging identity. The proposed degree will 
prepare learners to be competitive in a rapidly changing world and will empower them 
to pursue professional and career opportunities as well as graduate and professional 
education. The degree will provide broad learning experiences that facilitate critical 
awareness, cultural sensitivity, social responsibility, civic engagement, and global 
citizenship. Learners will be exposed to workplace experience through a comprehensive 
practicum, co-op and mentorship program that will facilitate their entry into the 
professional sphere. 

The BA, Interdisciplinary Arts Major will encourage learners to take courses across a 
very wide spectrum in Visual Arts, Creative Writing, Music, Business, Interdisciplinary 
Design Studies, Psychology, Cultural Studies, Anthropology, and other "elds. This 
degree program is designed to prepare students to work in arts, culture, and media 
environments that are, in today's marketplace, tremendously interdisciplinary and 
diverse. 

The degree program will offer educational opportunities accessible to a range of 
learners. Through strategic partnerships between various stakeholders at Kwantlen 
(Creative Writing, Visual Arts, Music, Cultural Studies, Learning Communities, 
Anthropology, Psychology, among others), learners in the degree program with diverse 
backgrounds will be able to choose educational pathways to best suit their needs. 
Multiple entry points and bridging opportunities will re!ect Kwantlen’s commitment to 
accessible, polytechnic, university-based lifelong learning. All members of the degree 
community will support a learning environment that maximizes learner success and 
fosters a continuing relationship with Kwantlen. 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

The instructional philosophy of the degree will recognize the pivotal role that the 
Kwantlen community will play in supporting learners to develop their values, direction, 
and fundamental character. Personal, academic, and professional development will be 
integrated. Approaches to teaching will be based on foundational principles of 
mentorship, humility, discovery, purposefulness, and learner autonomy. Faculty will 
demonstrate an authentic spirit of interdisciplinary inquiry and will model this for 
learners. In turn, learners will be supported in diverse modes of inquiry by a teaching 
environment that is collaborative, innovative, creative and respectful. Emerging and 
experimental teaching methods and research-driven pedagogy will be embraced. The 
degree program will provide a dynamic community of inquiry that is learner-focused, 
innovative, interdisciplinary, and socially and culturally responsible. Learner 
engagement will extend beyond the classroom to encompass community and industry 
partners and peers. 

The BA in Interdisciplinary Arts will embody Kwantlen’s vision to be an innovative and 
outstanding Polytechnic University that provides a balance of pure, practical and 
applied educational experiences to learners from diverse backgrounds. By integrating 
theory with practice, the degree will serve regional needs, re!ect community values, and 
provide a desirable destination for those seeking an accessible and relevant learning 
environment. The BA in Interdisciplinary Arts will be an archetypal example of 
Kwantlen’s diversity, inclusivity, and continued evolution. 

Many community, industry, educational, and student stakeholders have expressed 
strong support for the BA in Interdisciplinary Arts, which has been speci"cally designed 
to meet labour market needs. Stakeholder endorsements (including endorsements from 
Mayor Dianne Watts, broadcasters Philip Till and Rafe Mair, and others) are included 
as Appendix F, beginning on page 34). 

D. 
Access 
1. 
What entry requirements should applicants be expected to meet? If there are multiple 
entry points, please specify requirements for each. Are entrance requirements 
appropriate? Are learners likely to be successful? 
Access and Success 

Kwantlen’s commitment to accessibility is founded upon a long history of serving the 
needs of the South Fraser region of British Columbia. The Interdisciplinary Arts 
program (the Major as well as associated activities for "rst and second year learners) 
will be keenly sensitive to these needs and will provide educational opportunities to a 
wide range of learners. Indeed, given its structure and purpose, the Interdisciplinary 
Arts program will be one of the most diverse programs offerings at Kwantlen. 

The program will provide opportunities for students with diverse backgrounds to 
choose educational pathways that best suit their needs. Interdisciplinary learning, 
career-focused curriculum, culturally-sensitive content, and practicum opportunities will 
foster accessible, lifelong learning for those in the Interdisciplinary Arts program. 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

Flexible, multidimensional teaching (based on mentorship and the fusion of personal 
and professional development) will ensure that the program is tailored to the speci"c 
needs of learners. Multiple modes of learning across multiple campuses will enhance the 
program’s accessibility and desirability for many learners. The Interdisciplinary Arts 
program will be both comprehensive and responsive to the needs of community and 
industry. 

Learners will be guided through the pathways of entry to the Major from the moment 
of their "rst expression of interest in Interdisciplinary studies. The Interdisciplinary Arts 
Major will be the cornerstone of Interdisciplinary studies at Kwantlen, and as such it 
will draw many learners who are interested in a diverse and challenging university 
experience. Many of these types of learners currently struggle with "nding pathways 
through and beyond "rst year. They encounter hurdles of language, quali"cation, 
process, and administration. The Interdisciplinary Arts program will seek out these 
learners from the point of their initial entry at Kwantlen and provide for them access to 
educational mentorship to facilitate their smooth entry and continuity at Kwantlen. 

The regular Kwantlen BA entrance requirements will apply to those learners entering 
Kwantlen from secondary school or as mature learners. These requirements are quoted 
below (also see Appendix B): 

Learners may be admitted into the BA program at any time that admission requirements are met 
and will receive priority course registration. For admission to the BA program, learners must have a 
grade of ‘B’ in English 12 (or equivalents) and a grade of ‘C’ in either Principles of Math 11 (or 
equivalent) or Applications of Math 12. Learners who do not qualify upon initial application at 
Kwantlen but possess at least a ‘C’ in English 12 (or equivalent) and a passing grade in Principles of 
Math 11 (or equivalent) or Applications of Math 12 will be able to apply for entry to the BA 
Qualifying Year. Learners will be admitted to the BA program in the second year provided they have 
successfully completed appropriate qualifying courses. Other unsuccessful applicants will be 
encouraged to meet an Educational Advisor for the appropriate qualifying courses that satisfy the 
application criteria. Registration access to third or fourth year courses will be !rst awarded to 
learners who have completed at least 60 credits or coursework with a cumulative GPA of 2.00, as 
well as a grade of ‘C’ in all required courses including the English writing requirement, 2 
Quantitative courses, 12 credits of breadth courses, the language requirement, Principles of Math 
11 (or equivalent), and all !rst and second year course requirements for their declared major and/or 
minor program(s). 

Some learners will also transfer from other institutions under the normal Kwantlen 
transfer guidelines. Others will choose the Interdisciplinary Arts program after 
completing a Trades or English Language Pro"ciency diploma at Kwantlen (using 
pathways already established by, for example, The School of Business). 

The Interdisciplinary Arts program will make active links to learners in secondary 
school, to those with unconventional learning backgrounds, to those who bring diverse 
cultural identities, and to those who have not found an educational home within the 
traditional university system. Finding and mentoring these learners in their "rst year 
(and even before their "rst year) will be a primary goal of the Interdisciplinary Arts 
program. 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

From application to graduation, a seamless system of support involving all members of 
the Kwantlen community will ensure that the learning environment of the 
Interdisciplinary Arts program will maximize student success. First year programs, 
academic advising, learning centers, supplemental instruction, "nancial aid 
opportunities, and required foundational course work ensure that students attain their 
chosen credentials. 

Access and Completion: Details and Requirements 

For complete details, please see Appendix D, on page 32. 

Learners will achieve the BA Interdisciplinary Arts degree by completing a minimum of 
120 credit hours with a cumulative grade point average of 2.0. In addition to satisfying 
all the essential requirements listed, learners must complete at least 65 of the 120 credit 
hours in arts subjects, and at least 45 credits must be taken at the upper levels (3000 or 
higher). 

The following requirements (essential to completing all Kwantlen general arts degree 
programs) are to be completed during the "rst 60 credits of study: 

A six-credit writing-intensive requirement. 

A minimum 9-credit quantitative requirement, at least 6 credits of which are to be 
completed within the "rst 60 credits taken. These 9 credits must include a minimum of 
3 courses. 

To be listed as quantitative for the purposes of the Bachelor of Interdisciplinary Arts 
degree, courses must have quantitative reasoning (e.g., numerical, geometric, statistical, 
or probabilistic), or formal reasoning (e.g., mathematical or logically deductive), or 
scienti"c reasoning (involving the scienti"c method in general, and/or the methodology 
or content of a speci"c scienti"c discipline) as a basic principle in their primary subject 
matter. 

At least three credits (i.e., one course) of the above 9 quantitative credits must be taken 
from courses offered by the Faculty of Science, Mathematics and Technology or School 
of Horticulture. 

A 24-credit breadth requirement, consisting of a minimum of one 1000-2000 level 
course in at least four separate social science or humanities disciplines outside of 
Creative Writing and Visual Arts. Courses identi"ed as liberal education and capstone 
courses also may be credited toward this requirement. 

A second language to grade 11 or 6-credit post-secondary language requirement is 
required. (Learners who can demonstrate competency in a second language may have 
this requirement waived). 

Two Interdisciplinary Arts courses are also required within the "rst 60 credits (or, upon 
transfer from another institution): IDEA 1100 and IDEA 2100. These courses will assist 
learners in shaping their educational paths. 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

In addition, learners must complete the following to earn the degree: 
A minimum of 120 credits, with at least 45 credits at the 3000 or 4000 levels. 
IDEA 3100 and IDEA 4100, the capstone courses. 
At least 60 credits at Kwantlen Polytechnic University 
(this requirement may be reduced with approval from the BA Degree Advisor). 


In the context of the degree, IDEA 4100 will provide a speci"c, pedagogically-driven 
structure of community placement and mentor review. Learners will demonstrate their 
learning by way of assessment by a panel of peers, community mentors, and faculty 
advisors. 

2. 
Will the structure of the program allow for full-time, part-time, evening, weekend, online, 
mixed-mode delivery methods, or a combination of any of these? 
In the Interdisciplinary Arts Major, learners will be actively involved in the design and 
implementation of their learning activities. They will not only be following a path but 
making that path, through interdisciplinary collaborations, links to the community, 
career initiatives, project designs, and so on. In this sense, they will build their own 
learning schedule and pathways. As such, Interdisciplinary Arts will be a uniquely 
!exible program. 

Additionally, the structure of the program will embrace part-time, evening, and 
weekend delivery methods. The program is committed to making courses accessible at 
all times of the day and will schedule classes accordingly to give learners with various 
time constraints the opportunity to access all courses over several years. Many courses 
will be offered online or mixed-mode. Directed study and condensed studio courses will 
be available for learners when necessary. 

3. 
Will the structure of the program allow for multiple entry and exit points? 
Learners may be admitted to the Interdisciplinary Arts Major after having earned a 
maximum of 60 credits toward the degree. Placement in the program will be based on 
articulated credits and prior-learning assessment. Learners may take courses on a part-
time basis. 

Additionally, the Interdisciplinary Arts program will forge institutional links to other 

disciplines and programs at Kwantlen, so that multiple entry points will exist for 

learners who pursue certi"cates and diplomas in other areas. The structure of the 

Interdisciplinary Arts program will support pathways for diploma and certi"cate 

learners to continue their learning to the degree level. 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

E. 
Learner Pro!le 
1. 
Who are your target learners (age, gender, educational background, work experience)? 
Where do they come from (recent high school graduates, mature learners, transfers 
from other institutions)? How do you plan to recruit or attract these learners? Are there 
other characteristics applicants should have that you identify as important? 
Prospective learners will be comprised of recent high-school graduates, individuals 
transferring from other post-secondary institutions, mature learners returning to school 
for a career change, social services practitioners seeking augmentative learning, learners 
focusing on arts and cultural advocacy, learners focusing on the business of arts in the 
public sphere, learners continuing on to degrees after completing certi"cates or 
diplomas at Kwantlen, and members of the general public with an interest in 
interdisciplinary and expressive arts. Prospective learners will possess a wide variety of 
vocational, educational, and life experiences but will share a commitment to creativity, 
innovation, and personal development. The program will attract a diverse range of 
learners in the following areas: 

Social and cultural services; mental health services; community health and development; 
arts advocacy and development; cultural advocacy and development; primary and 
secondary education; counselling; personal and professional development; professional 
arts (writing, visual arts, music, etc.); religious studies; recreational therapies; arts 
research; arts performance; arts and craft professionals. 

Some prospective learners will be those considering a career in expressive arts therapies 
with the MA in Expressive Arts Therapies, MA in Counselling Psychology, or MA in 
Art Therapy as their terminal degree. Typically, such learners enroll in BA programs in 
Psychology, Visual Arts, Creative Writing, Social Work, Theatre, Music, or English 
Literature. These programs are chosen by such learners as default replacements for their 
intended program – Expressive Arts Therapies – which is not currently available in BC. 
The BA, Interdisciplinary Arts Major will fully prepare such students with the 
educational background and credentials for entry to graduate training in Expressive 
Arts Therapies. In fact, completion of the BA Interdisciplinary Arts will provide learners 
with the credits required to apply for admission to every graduate program in 
Expressive Arts Therapies in Canada and almost all such programs in the United States. 
Moreover, conversations are underway with graduate-level training programs in British 
Columbia to offer preferred entry for graduates of the Interdisciplinary Arts Major. 
(One such preferred-entry agreement has already been completed, in principle, with the 
Vancouver Art Therapy Institute, the main graduate program in Art Therapy in British 
Columbia.) 

Additionally, planned cross-disciplinary linkages between the Interdisciplinary Arts 
program and Kwantlen trades and technology programs will enable trades and 
technology learners who complete diplomas or certi"cates to continue on to degree 
completion with the Interdisciplinary Arts Major. 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

In many ways, the Interdisciplinary Arts Major will be unique to Kwantlen and to the 
landscape of undergraduate post-secondary education in British Columbia. Often it is 
dif"cult to conceptualize information when no prior context exists. Accordingly, the 
following examples describe various learners who will be typical of the Interdisciplinary 
Arts cohort. 

Example One: Expressive Arts Therapies Career Focus 

A learner from Langley seeks a counselling career with individuals, families, and 
children using creative modalities such as art, music, and poetry. She seeks accreditation 
as a Registered Art Therapist, for which she will be required to complete a graduate 
program (three programs exist in British Columbia). The learner discovers that the 
Interdisciplinary Arts program has been designed, in part, through direct consultations 
with the various graduate schools and that Interdisciplinary Arts learners are fast-
tracked for admission. The learner enrolls in the Interdisciplinary Arts Major. 
A letter of endorsement for this speci"c pathway is included on page 42.) 

Example Two: Professional Welding Arts 

A learner completes Kwantlen’s Welding Level C certi"cate and decides to take a 
holiday as a reward for his efforts. While in the main terminal at Vancouver 
International Airport, he sees Bill Reid’s colossal bronze sculpture The Jade Canoe. 
Subsequently, the learner becomes deeply interested in metal sculpture and seeks to 
further his arts education with the goal of becoming a professional metal artist. He 
hears about the Interdisciplinary Arts program and connects with a mentor who guides 
him through the foundational coursework that will lead him to the Interdisciplinary 
Arts Major. 

Example Three: Secondary Education Musical Instruction 

A learner in his "rst year at Kwantlen seeks to become a secondary school music 
teacher. He is particularly interested in interdisciplinarity, alternate, and integrative 
teaching which nurtures the fundamental creativity and musical expressiveness of 
young people. He therefore seeks an undergraduate program that re!ects the values, 
purpose, and direction he has chosen for his career. He chooses the Kwantlen 
Interdisciplinary Arts program for its unique blend of creativity, mentorship, and 
!exible curriculum. 
A letter of endorsement for this speci"c pathway is included on page 37.) 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

Example Four: Innovative Construction Design in Japan 

While completing the Carpentry Certi"cate at Kwantlen’s College of Trades and 
Technology, a learner becomes interested in sustainable and innovative building design. 
Subsequently she seeks an academic pathway forward that will lead her to a career in 
sustainable construction. She connects with a mentor in the Interdisciplinary Arts 
program who helps her to build an undergraduate program to suit her needs. In the 
third year of her undergraduate program, the learner develops a practicum project with 
a construction "rm developing a residential construction business for the Japanese 
market. As part of her practicum, the learner designs a cultural awareness program for 
the construction "rm. In order to complete this task, she enrolls in Interdisciplinary Arts 
courses and Cultural Studies courses in which she learns about Japanese business 
practices, culture, art, and mythology. As a result of her efforts, the learner completes 
her Interdisciplinary Arts Major and is offered immediate employment with the "rm in 
which she completed her practicum. 

Example Five: Writing and Publishing Career Focus 

A learner with an abiding interest in writing enters Kwantlen with tremendous creative 
energy paired with an uncertain academic focus. Learners who are interested in writing 
often struggle to "nd academic pathways and therefore "nd themselves spread across 
various departments (English, Creative Writing, Journalism, etc.). The learner attends an 
Interdisciplinary Arts information evening and learns that the Interdisciplinary Arts 
program offers him the opportunity to blend together his passion for Haiku poetry and 
his plans to leverage his sundry blog postings on creativity into a small business online. 
He chooses the Interdisciplinary Arts program. Subsequently, his practicum involves 
copywriting at Vancouver Magazine (with which the Interdisciplinary Arts program has 
forged strong links), and the learner begins to build professional relationships that 
allow him to publish his work in a wide variety of settings. As his work circulates 
among an ever-widening audience, his online pro"le grows and his creative consulting 
website becomes commercially viable. 
Letters of endorsement for this speci"c pathway are included on page 36.) 

Example Six: Interdisciplinary Horticulture Design 

A learner attends Kwantlen’s School of Horticulture’s Landscape Design and 
Installation Diploma. While in the program, the learner becomes very interested in 
water and food shortage issues in Africa. She joins a community of social advocates 
who are working with communities in Mali to build sustainable food-crop village 
gardens. Recognizing the cultural, political, and environmental challenges associated 
with this initiative, the learner pursues the Interdisciplinary Arts program. She 
completes Interdisciplinary Arts and Visual Arts courses in which she learns of the 
mythologies and histories of Africa. She takes courses in Community and Health 
Studies to learn about the interface between culture and health. She completes Business 
courses to learn how to "nd and secure funding for her village garden project. And, of 
course, she travels to Africa and completes a practicum that involves the building of a 
village garden. 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

The abovee examples demonstrate the breadth, depth, and engagement of the Interdisciplinary 
Arts program, which will offer a home to learners who seek interdisciplinary, innovate learning. 
(Two further examples are shown in Appendix A.) 

2. 
How will the program address the needs of under-prepared learners? How will you get 
these learners into a qualifying year? 
To meet the needs of under-prepared learners, opportunities for prior-learning 
assessment will be provided. Kwantlen offers a comprehensive, laddered system of 
appropriate preparatory courses within our Qualifying Studies Department. 
Additionally, learners will be required to complete LCOM 1100, a course in the 
purpose and direction of university studies. The Interdisciplinary Arts program will 
attract many learners who have multicultural and diverse backgrounds. Accordingly, 
some learners will need assistance with various aspects of cultural and academic 
transition. As the Interdisciplinary Arts program emphasizes cultural themes, these 
learners will be mentored through qualifying pathways and assisted with academic 
development beginning in their "rst semester (though the Interdisciplinary Arts 
mentorship initiative, which will be embedded in Interdisciplinary Arts 1100). 

3. 
How will the program address equity by decreasing systemic barriers? Is this type of 
program traditionally or historically underrepresented in speci!c cohort groups? (e.g., 
gender and/or age imbalance, First Nations) How will the program address these 
issues? 
Currently, undergraduate opportunities for education in Interdisciplinary Arts in British 
Columbia are sparse (though thriving programs do exist in many parts of the world). A 
systemic barrier to access therefore exists for all BC learners. Many local learners who 
seek Interdisciplinary Arts training at the undergraduate level travel to the United States 
or Europe and meet the "nancial burden that such trips incur. The Interdisciplinary Arts 
program at Kwantlen will be consistent with the emerging best practices of 
interdisciplinary modalities, which emphasize diversity and equity with regard to 
gender, age, ethnicity, religion, etc. Approaches to First Nations populations will be 
particularly emphasized, as such groups focus extensively on expressive modalities (art, 
poetry, storytelling, etc.). 

Additionally, the Interdisciplinary Arts program will encourage – by its very nature – 
linkages to various under-represented cultural groups in the South Fraser region. The 
!exible curriculum and culturally appropriate pedagogy will be of great interest to 
those learners who seek alternate modes of inquiry and engagement. 

The Interdisciplinary Arts Major will be a desirable educational destination among 
those who are just beginning their post-secondary journey and are in search of a 
learning environment that is accessible, relevant, integrative, and interdisciplinary. These 
young learners are the foundation of Kwantlen’s role in the community and represent 
an essential cohort group that is traditionally under-represented in the post-secondary 
system in British Columbia. The Interdisciplinary Arts program will respond to this 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

challenge by welcoming traditional learners as well as those who might be termed ‘nonconventional.’ 
Such learners will recognize, in the Interdisciplinary Arts program, an 
educational environment that has created a space and place for their distinctive needs 
and schedules. 

F. 
Program Description 
1. 
Provide a broad description of the program outcomes, and how this program relates to 
existing or proposed programs at Kwantlen. 
Interdisciplinary Arts refers to a speci"c set of educational activities, goals and 
strategies. Based on innovative pedagogy and integrative approaches to learning, 
interdisciplinary arts studies involve the synthesis and synergy of various disciplines 
toward a cohesive, uni"ed educational experience. Interdisciplinarity is much more than 
enrollment in courses from more than a single discipline. Authentic interdisciplinarity 
emphasizes the linkages between disciplines by focusing on contrasting and 
complementary aspects of diverse educational domains. Interdisciplinary studies 
encourage students to develop broader intellectual skills, greater facility for critical 
thinking, and greater awareness of the social relevance of their education. 
Interdisciplinary students have the opportunity to develop exemplary skills in problem 
solving, insight, team-building, lateral thinking, and multi-modal learning styles. 
Interdisciplinary strategies involve approaching an issue or problem from various 
perspectives. This typically entails intellectual inquiries that range beyond the borders 
of any single discipline or domain. While still respecting the function of the boundaries 
between domains, interdisciplinary approaches recognize that those boundaries are 
essentially arbitrary and do not always serve the goals of learning. Global warming and 
the AIDS pandemic are two examples of contemporary issues that require 
interdisciplinary approaches. 

Interdisciplinary Arts emphasize the integration of the domains of the Arts, Trades, 
Humanities and Social Sciences. Current educational opportunities in BC for 
undergraduate interdisciplinary training are sparse. BC universities have not taken 
advantage of the recent worldwide groundswell of interest in undergraduate 
interdisciplinary approaches. Kwantlen’s Interdisciplinary Arts program will offer 
foundational courses in diverse disciplines (including, but not limited to: Visual Arts, 
Psychology, Music, Business, Creative Writing, Cultural Studies, and Applied Design). 
Additionally, the Interdisciplinary Arts program will offer integrative and 
interdisciplinary courses in the professional application of these disciplines. Learners 
will deepen their innovation and creativity and will learn skills to allow them to adapt 
to rapidly changing labour markets. 

In responding to demographic trends toward integrative approaches to the arts, culture, 
health, business, and community development, the program will offer learners a solid 
career path as well as a number of choices for continued study. The degree will increase 
communication and co-operation between the Visual Arts, Psychology, Trades, Music, 
Applied Design, English, and Creative Writing departments (among others). Degree 
learners will be encouraged to take courses outside of the Humanities such as Business 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

and Science in order to ensure that students’ curriculum needs are met. The 
Interdisciplinary Arts Major will also provide a wide range of courses, such as those in 
Cultural Studies, that serve as breadth components. 

2. How does the proposed program support existing programs at Kwantlen? 
The Interdisciplinary Arts Major will provide a destination for learners wishing to 
transfer into a Major program and any BA General Studies students who may wish to 
establish a more speci"c Major. Furthermore, the Interdisciplinary Arts Major will 
attract students from two-year university-transfer programs at other regional 
universities and colleges. Moreover, the Interdisciplinary Arts Major will provide a 
place for students who have left larger institutions seeking excellent teaching, smaller 
classrooms, and a nurturing and supportive learning community. 

Additionally – and importantly – the Interdisciplinary Arts program will forge links 
between many departments and programs at Kwantlen and will provide educational 
pathways for learners in diploma and certi"cate programs who wish to pursue 
education at the degree level. In this sense, the Interdisciplinary Arts program will be an 
accessible bridge between diploma and certi"cate programs and undergraduate degrees. 

And, "nally, the Interdisciplinary Arts Major will embody the fundamental charter of 
Kwantlen Polytechnic University, which is to provide interdisciplinary education. The 
word Polytechnic means, essentially, Interdisciplinary. 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

3. 
How will the program ensure educational effectiveness (e.g., retention rates, completion 
rates, success rates for progression)? Does the program create opportunities for learners 
to ladder from current programs? 
The Interdisciplinary Arts program will recognize the essential integration of personal, 
academic, and professional development. Approaches to teaching will be based on 
foundational principles of mentorship, discovery, and learner autonomy. 
Interdisciplinary Arts faculty will demonstrate an authentic spirit of inquiry and model 
this for learners. In turn, learners will be supported in diverse modes of inquiry by a 
teaching environment that is collaborative, innovative, creative and respectful. The 
program will provide a dynamic community of inquiry that is learner-focused, 
innovative, interdisciplinary, and socially and culturally responsible. Teaching modes 
will emphasize mentorship, engagement, personal development, and interpersonal 
connection. 

Learner engagement will extend beyond the classroom to encompass community and 
industry partners and peers. Interdisciplinary Arts faculty will recognize and be 
responsive to alternate approaches to teaching and complementary styles of learning. 
New technologies, emerging and experimental teaching methods, and research-driven 
pedagogy will be embraced and contextualized within a learning environment founded 
upon personal relationships. 

These values, approaches and perspectives will ensure educational effectiveness and 
loyalty among learners. 

With regard to program content, the Interdisciplinary Arts Major will allow learners to 
design programs of study that will prepare them for careers or further study in areas 
such as social services, cultural and arts industries, community service, primary and 
secondary education, professional arts and craft, religious studies, business, and 
graduate school. In addition to providing opportunities for the many internal students 
who wish to continue their education at Kwantlen beyond the "rst two years of study, 
the Interdisciplinary Arts Major will provide opportunities for learners completing two 
years of undergraduate work at any of the colleges or universities in the province to 
transfer into the program when space is available. 

Additionally, undergraduate students in BC who are interested in expressive arts 
therapies do not currently have the opportunity to complete an undergraduate degree in 
their chosen "eld of study. The Interdisciplinary Arts Major will be highly attractive to 
these students, who are likely to commit to and complete the program before 
continuing their training at the graduate level. 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

4. 
Describe how the proposed program incorporates co-op placements, work experience, 
practicum, clinical practice, etc. 
From the beginning of their involvement with the Interdisciplinary Arts program, 
learners will start to build bridges to community employers. Course projects will 
emphasize practical and career-driven application and will offer learners opportunities 
to collaborate with other departments at Kwantlen and with other learners. In this way 
learners will build a network of peers and contacts which will serve them well as they 
enter the workforce. Additionally, practicum and co-op experiences will be a 
foundational aspect of the learning activities of every Interdisciplinary Arts participant. 

5. 
Does this program include Prior Learning Assessment (PLA) as per Policy B.14 Credit 
for Prior Learning? 
The Interdisciplinary Arts program will include Prior Learning Assessment methods. A 
challenge assignment and interview are required for each course for which a PLA is 
requested. 

6. 
Are current faculty able to deliver the program? 
The Interdisciplinary Arts program will draw from multiple departments, each of which 
already possesses faculty quali"ed to teach the Interdisciplinary Arts courses that will 
anchor "rst and second year and will act as capstones for the Major. 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

G. 
Outcomes 
1. 
Will this program allow learners to continue with further study? Describe laddering, 
bridging, or post-credential continuation of education. 
The Interdisciplinary Arts program will prepare learners for careers or further study in 
diverse areas such as media, arts, culture, education, community development, 
collaborative and public arts, writing and publishing, arts performance, mental health, 
community health, primary and secondary education, professional arts advocacy, 
religious studies, etc. Many students will choose to continue on to graduate school in 
"elds such as Psychology, Visual Arts, Creative Writing, Music, Expressive Arts 
Therapies, and Interdisciplinary Studies. The Interdisciplinary Arts program will also 
prepare students exceptionally well for the Professional Development Program in 
Education. 

2. 
What is the nature of the work learners are being prepared for? 
Include current labour market data that shows a demand for this type of graduate. 
As indicated above, the careers and further study available to graduates of the 
Interdisciplinary Arts Major are very broad, and include multiple paths and options. It 
is, therefore, dif"cult to offer one clear perspective on the nature of work that learners 
will pursue. However, the proposal template requests “current labour market data” for 
a speci"c type of work. Accordingly, the proposal includes (below) such information for 
one type of graduate – the arts professional – but please note that this data applies only 
to that speci"c career path, not to the many other paths that learners in the program 
might choose. 

Labour Market Data for the Arts Professional 

25,900 artists in British Columbia spend more time at their art or cultural practice than 
at any other occupation. Among the 10 provinces, British Columbia has the largest 
percentage of its labour force in arts and culture occupations (1.08%), the only 
province above 1% and a "gure that is well above the Canadian average of 0.77%. 
At 
$545 million, the total earnings of artists account for 0.65% of total earnings in the 
overall provincial labour force. 

As compared with other provincial jurisdictions in Canada, the number of artists in 
British Columbia increased much more rapidly than the overall provincial labour force 
between 1991 and 2006 (58% vs. 37%). Between 1991 and 2001, the number of artists 
more than doubled in three large B.C. cities: Coquitlam, Richmond and Port 
Coquitlam. There was very signi"cant growth in the arts in many other large B.C. cities, 
including Surrey (70%), Langley (82%), New Westminster (82%), and Kamloops 
(70%). 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

Please take a moment to re-read and absorb the increase in arts and culture 
professionals in Surrey and Langley, two of Kwantlen’s main catchment areas: 70% and 
82%, respectively. This amounts to a veritable explosion of arts and culture 
professionals in the region. But it makes sense: in British Columbia, one in every 27 
people has an arts or cultural occupation. Moreover, the average annual income of arts 
and culture professionals in British Columbia is 45% higher than the national average 
(but still relatively low, at $35,000). 

The percentage of arts and culture professionals in British Columbia with a bachelor’s 
degree or higher is 37%, nearly double the rate in the general workforce. At 47%, the 
percentage of artists who are self-employed is over "ve times the self-employment rate 
in the overall labour force (9%). It’s clear from this last statistic that arts and culture 
professionals need training with regard to professional practice, which they will get in 
the Interdisciplinary Arts program. 

Although artists work in many different sectors of the economy, the industry with the 
highest number of artists is arts, entertainment and recreation (10,000, or 39% of all 
artists). In addition, a substantial number of artists work in educational services (5,500) 
and information and cultural industries(5,000). 

Arts and culture professionals in British Columbia work in many diverse "elds but are 
represented most strongly in music (5,900), writing (4,300), visual arts (3,800), and 
artisans and craftspeople (3,500). Please note that these are precisely the core areas of 
the Interdisciplinary Arts program. 

The number of arts and culture professionals in Canada is greater than the number of 
Canadians directly employed in the automotive industry (135,000). As mentioned 
previously (though worth repeating), from 1991 to 2006 the number of arts and culture 
professionals in British Columbia grew by 58% – the greatest increase in all of 
Canada, and much higher than the growth rate of the general labour force. 

These statistics are widespread, well-established, and surprising for those not familiar 
with arts and culture professions. But the simple fact is that arts and culture industries 
now employ more people in Canada – especially in British Columbia – than many other 
traditional industries (more than twice the number of forestry workers and banking 
industry professionals). The cultural sector in Canada now employs about 609,000 
workers and comprises 3.3% of the overall labour force in Canada. 

The Interdisciplinary Arts program will be attentive to the fact that university-educated 
arts and culture professionals earn 38% more than artists with a high school education. 
(There were 90% more artists with a university certi"cate, diploma or degree in 2006 
than in 1991.) University education has now become essential for arts and culture 
workers who wish to earn a reasonable income. When this consideration is coupled 
with the high rates of self-employment (42%, six times the rate in the overall labour 
force), the importance of career-focused, relevant curriculum becomes even more 
obvious. Currently, Kwantlen’s offering in this regard is limited. The Interdisciplinary 
Arts program will change this situation by helping learners to implement lifelong 
strategies for economically successful careers in arts and culture. A graduate of the 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

Interdisciplinary Arts Major will know to make a living as an arts and culture 
professional. 

Additionally, the number of arts and culture professionals in Canada from visible 
minority groups more than doubled in number between 1991 and 2006 (123% 
growth). As an institution with a primary cultural pro"le of visible minority groups, 
Kwantlen would do well to respond to this massive increase. The Interdisciplinary Arts 
program, with its culturally relevant curriculum, is ideally situated to do so. 

(All statistics derived from the Statistical Insights on the Arts series from Hill Strategies 
Research, March 2009. Funded by the Canada Council for the Arts, the Department of 
Canadian Heritage, and the Ontario Arts Council.) 

H. Consultations 
1. 
With who have you consulted internally regarding this proposal? What were the results 
of these consultations? Please provide names, dates, and summary of feedback. 
Consultations have taken place with current learners, faculty, departments, curriculum 
committees, community partners, educational institutions, professionals, and so on. 
Please see Appendix A for a summary of the feedback received. 

2. 
With whom have you consulted externally regarding this proposal? What were the 
results of these consultations? Please provide names, dates, and summary of 
discussions. 
Consultations have included community, industry, and educational stakeholders. 
Endorsements were requested and received in May, 2009 and are reproduced in full as 
Appendix E, beginning on page 34. 

I. 
Institutional Resources 
1. 
What expertise, equipment, facilities and library resources will the program require to 
support learner learning? Ensure that any required new resources in these areas are 
identi!ed in the Costs section (I). 
Currently faculty possess the expertise required to teach the Interdisciplinary Arts 
program (two of the courses, IDEA 3100 and IDEA 4100, are already being taught). 
Additionally, Kwantlen currently possesses appropriate audio/visual equipment, 
facilities, and library resources. 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

2. 
Outline anticipated requirements for equipment, specialized space, etc.: (classrooms, 
labs, shops, general space) 
The Interdisciplinary Arts program can begin without any new equipment or 
specialized space. Indeed, the capstone courses already exist and are now in their 
second year of offering. However, as the program grows, it will foster an increasing 
sense of community among learners in the program, and this will require a 
departmental of"ce and lounge (with associated resources) in which learners may study 
or meet in discussion. Administrative needs must also be assessed as the program 
develops, but it is anticipated that such support may be required within three years. 

Additionally, the Interdisciplinary Arts Major will require coordination services, 
particularly with regard to assisting learners to plan their degree pathways. Other 
groups at Kwantlen are currently (as of October, 2009) working on interdisciplinary 
degree proposals, and discussions have been held with one of those groups (the 
department of Philosophy) to collaborate on the development of an administrative 
centre for interdisciplinary work. The results of these discussions are contingent upon 
which of the several proposed interdisciplinary degrees move forward. But regardless of 
which degree proposals eventually manifest as actual degree offerings, there will be a 
need, in the near future, for Kwantlen to provide an interdisciplinary administrative 
hub. 


Program Concept: BA, Interdisciplinary Arts 

J. 
Costs 
What will be the following costs? 
Provide accurate estimates. 
Estimated Cost Items 
Non-recurring start-up costs 
Time Release for program development $0 
Faculty Recruitment $0 
Service Courses $0 
Capital Costs $0 
(none required for startup; 
See section I, subsections 1 and 2) 
Operating Costs 
Faculty FTE: .5 $50,000 annually 
(Coordination) 
Technical Support $0 
Administrative Support $0 
(none required for startup; 
See section I, subsections 1 and 2) 
Service Support $10,947.30 
( 0.25 FTE Admissions Assistant) 
(See Appendix B) 
Library (annual) $12,000 
(See Appendix B) 
Lab Operating Costs $0 
Required Service Courses $0 
Other 
Total $72,947.30 



Appendices 


Appendix A 
Internal Consultations 


The following Curriculum Committees have been consulted, 
with full endorsement of the proposal: 

Humanities 
Social Sciences 
Community and Health Studies 

The following departments have been consulted, 
with full endorsement of the proposal: 

Creative Writing 
Music 
Visual Arts 
Learning Communities 
English 
Psychology 

The following individuals have been consulted, 
with full endorsement of the proposal: 

Dana Cserepes Department of Visual Arts 
Sibeal Foyle Department of Visual Arts 
Don Hlus Department of Music 
Ross Laird Department of Creative Writing 
Jocelyn Lymburner Department of Psychology 
Rick Cuff Centre for Design & Communications 
Rob Fleming Associate Vice-President, Academic 
Sarah Hickinbottom Chair, Department of Learning Communities 
Larissa Petrillo Department of Anthropology 
Zena Mitchell Registrar Services 
Mary Jane Stenberg Executive Director, External Relations 
Newton Wainman Department of Academic and Career Preparation 

Students have been consulted as well, using Kwantlen’s UserVoice feedback system. 
Currently (October 1, 2009), there are 50 student endorsements on the 
UserVoice system. 


Speci"c consultations, as indicated by the Concept Proposal template, 
begin on the next page. Letters of endorsement are included in Appendix E. 



Appendices 


Meg Goodine: Information and Educational Technology and the Centre for Academic Growth 

It looks like an amazing program and it strikes me as a great new opportunity and potential 
showcase for how technology can support innovation in teaching and learning. I'm always 
curious about what discussions around use of technology take place as these proposals are 
developed. Because of your involvement, I'm assuming some have happened here but I think it 
may be pretty rare. I've always felt that there would be value for students if there was some 
level of consistency across a program around how technology is used but faculty members all 
seem to have different views, attitudes and comfort levels about how and why to use 
technology. How can we (IET and the Centre for Academic Growth) best support the faculty 
members involved in this new initiative? 

I think as an innovative and interdisciplinary university, we will de"nitely need to change the 
way we support technology and to look at working together in new ways. I'm very interested 
in supporting a Drupal pilot but we have a constant struggle around how to support the 
proliferation of tools with limited resources. It might be a good idea for you to make a 
presentation at the Ed Tech Committee meeting in Sept to talk about the possibilities that 
Drupal could provide. I can make a better case with the Committee's support. 

Again, it looks like a very exciting program. Let me know if there is anything I can to do to 
help and I will do my best. 

Wendy Royal: English Language Studies 

I love it! I really like how it focuses on so-called non-traditional students and offers innovative 
courses as well as mentorship throughout their program. I de"nitely think it would have a lot 
of appeal for ESL students and I think it would be appropriate to include a couple of ESL 
student pro"les. I have brie!y outlined two below, both of which are roughly based on real-life 
examples from my own students. 

1. 
Jorge is a 30-something former journalist from Peru who is taking the Diploma in 
English Language Studies and working part-time in a menial job in order to support his 
wife and three children. He realises that his lack of English pro"ciency will probably 
prohibit him from re-entering his profession in Canada, but he would still like to "nd a 
career in which he could use his background knowledge, his love of writing, and his 
creativity. The Interdisciplinary Arts Degree would suit his interests and expertise 
perfectly; in addition, it will provide him with a marketable degree, an essential 
consideration, in light of his four dependents 
2. 
Simon is a 19-year-old student from China who is taking the Diploma in English 
Language Studies full-time. His passion is drawing, but his parents believe this is too 
frivolous, and want him to take a Business Degree at Kwantlen, so that he can get a 
reputable job. Simon is torn between his desire to pursue a career in the Arts and his 
wish to please and obey his parents. He also realizes that he needs to ‘be practical’ and 
‘think of his future job prospects’. The Interdisciplinary Arts Degree would enable him 
to pursue his interests as well as meet with the approval of his parents since it will 
satisfy the need to make a reasonable living in a career that has good work 
opportunities. 

Appendices 


Also, I have a few stats/policy statements which you may want to include in order to support 
your claim that Kwantlen needs to serve students with diverse cultural identities and aims at 
being inclusive and responsive to ‘non-conventional’ students. According to the Of"ce of 
Institutional Analysis and Planning Fall Registration Survey (2006, 2007), 68% of Kwantlen 
student respondents indicated that English was their "rst language. In 2008, this number had 
dropped to 50%. 

Additionally, the Policy on Cultural Competency “promotes a positive view on cultural 
diversity and is committed to preparing graduates suited for employment and success in a 
multicultural world with global perspectives” (Policy No. 1.6 Cultural Competency, 1997). 
http://www.kwantlen.bc.ca/policies/ policies/board/1-6cult.htm 

Finally, a couple of questions: 

1. 
Re the second language requirement. Would mother tongue + ESL meet these 
requirements? 
[Response: to be discussed at next stage.] 

2. 
Would you mind adding Diploma in English Language Pro"ciency along with the 
Trades Diploma on p. 6? 
[Response: document updated by request.] 

A degree like the one you are proposing has been long overdue at Kwantlen. I am very excited 
about it and look forward to your presenting it at S2C2! 

Zena Mitchell: Registrar Services 

I’ve had a chance to review the Progrm concept. Wow -- it looks as though a ton of work has 
gone into this so far. Hats off to you. 

Here is some feedback from my “Admissions, Records and Graduation” perspective: 

You have indicated an implementation date of Sept 2010. Please be advised that we start 
accepting applications for Sept 2010 as of Nov 1st 2009. 

[Response: the implementation date has been changed to January 2011.] 

On page 3, question 5 asks if this is a cohort, selective entry or open access program. By nature 
of the way you have this program set up (in terms of its admissions requirements and 
registration model), this is in fact a selective entry (priority registration) program. 

[Response: document updated by request. Also see comments from Jody Gordon, below.] 


Appendices 


In section D (Access -- on page 6), you outline “Regular Kwantlen BA entrance requirements 
will apply”. The program concept will require that you outline the speci"cs of this, as S2C2 
will want to see it. 

[Response: document updated to re!ect current guidelines.]

 Here are the current admission requirements for the BA (for both "rst and thrid year entry 
points): 

Students may be admitted into the BA program at any time that admission requirements are 
met and will receive priority course registration. For admission to the BA program, students 
must have a grade of ‘B’ in English 12 (or equivalent) and a grade of ‘C’ in either Principles of 
Math 11 (or equivalent) or Applications of Math 12. 

Students who do not qualify upon initial application at Kwantlen but possess at least a ‘C’ in 
English 12 (or equivalent) and a passing grade in Principles of Math 11 (or equivalent) or 
Applications of Math 12 will be able to apply for entry to the BA Qualifying Year. Students 
will be admitted to the BA program in the second year provided they have successfully 
completed appropriate qualifying courses. Other unsuccessful applicants are encouraged to 
meet an Educational Advisor for the appropriate qualifying courses that satisfy the application 
criteria. 
Registration access to third or fourth year courses is "rst awarded to students who have 
completed at least 60 credits or coursework with a cumulative GPA of 2.00, as well as a grade 
of 'C' in all required courses including the English writing requirement, 2 Quantitative courses, 
12 credits of breadth courses, the language requirement, Principles of Math 11 (or equivalent), 
and all "rst and second year course requirements for their declared major and/or minor 
program(s). 

[Response: document updated to include above requirements.] 

Some of Kwantlen’s degree programs require that students have a minimum grade in 
specialized courses. You may want to consider this for your capstone courses, seeing as these 
are the key courses that differentiate this degree from the Bachelor of Arts, General Studies. As 
an example, here is what fashion stipulates for third year progression requirements: 

Students continuing into year 3 of the degree program must have completed all requirements 
for years 1 and 2 with an average cumulative GPA of 2.7 or higher with a "nal grade of B- or 
greater in FASN 2200 (Design Drawing II) and FASN 2220 (Drafting and Sewing IV) 

[Response: to be discussed at the next stage of development.] 


Appendices 


On page 24, in Year One, you indicate WRIT 1100 (writing intensive) as a course. Until there is 
some closure on what constitutes a writing intensive course at Kwantlen, it is still within policy 
that all students completing a 4-year degree at Kwantlen are required to complet ENGL 1100. 
in order for this to pass at S2C2, I believe this WRIT 1100 will need to chage to ENGL 1100. 

[Response: document updated to include ENGL 1100 as the requirement.] 

You mention that the breadth courses could include courses outside of Social Sciences and 
Humanities (speci"cally Design and Communications, and Community and Health Studies). All 
of the programs within these faculties have seats that are reserved for program students 
(meaning their program students). Students from your program may be able to pick up a 
random course here and there, based on attrition, but (given our current registration model) are 
currently restricted from registering in these courses because seats are reserved only for Design 
and Health program students. This may need to be mapped out more speci"cally in order to 
determine the “how” of how will this work? 

[Response: conversations are underway with various departments.] 

Lastly, on page 19, the Estimated Cost of “Service Support” is listed as $0. Typically, Student 
Services includes an estimate for the resources required to provide the necessary support for a 
new program. As an example, given the projected student numbers for this program, and the 
fact that it is a selective entry (rather than open access) program, we would need to have a 
dedicated Admissions Assistant looking after this program (processing "rst-year admission, 
third-year continuance, and third year transfer students). Based on the number of students you 
have projected over the next four years, Admissions would require a 0.25 FTE Admissions 
Assistant to manage the program. The cost (salary and bene"ts) associated with a 0.25 FTE is 
$10,947.30. Could I ask that you please indicate this in the operating cost portion of the grid 
in Section J? This is not a cost that your department would incur; this is an operational cost the 
university needs to be aware of in the delivery of this new program. 

[Response: document updated as requested.] 

Jody Gordon: Registrar 

Some initial thoughts I have after reading the concept for the BA, Interdisciplinary Arts. On 
page 3 you indicate that this is not a selective entry cohort program but you also indicate that 
you expect to have 35 students enrolled in each year. Just want to be clear that if we do get 
more interest than 35 we cannot restrict access without you setting this up as a cohort program 
(similar to how the BA, CCJ works). From our perspective this is a selective entry/open 
registration program, meaning that students must meet a minimum threshold that is higher 
than the University entrance requirement (selective entry) but all that do prior to the deadline 
are admissible and enroll during the selective entry/open registration period (which is earlier 
than our students admitted to general university studies). So access once admitted becomes 
controlled by the total seats you offer in various courses. I would suggest changing your answer 
to question 5 to read: Yes, selective entry for admission purposes. 

[Response: document updated as requested.] 


Appendices 


On page 7, 3rd paragraph a typo - thee should read three. 

[Response: document updated as requested.] 

On page 7, the last paragraph before question 2 - “this requirement may be waived with 
approval of an advisor" should be rewritten as "this requirement may be reduced with 
approval from the BA Degree Advisor.” The policy allows for up to 75% of work to be 
completed at another institution. The BAs are all set at only 50% but this can be increased to 
75% but it cannot be waived entirely. That is why I am suggesting reduced meaning a student 
could end up only completing 30 credits at Kwantlen as opposed to the stated 60 credits. 

[Response: document updated as requested.] 

Karen Hearn: Facilities 

Ross, what an exciting new degree! I'd enjoy such studies. You have identi"ed that the program 
will require a departmental of"ce and lounge in the longer term with the startup using the 
“new Learning Communities of"ces.” Please let me know where these of"ces are that you are 
referring. 

[Response: currently, the lead developer of the IDA project (Ross Laird) shares the single of"ce 
of Creative Writing with six other faculty members. Ross Laird is also a member of the 
Department of Learning Communities, and in that capacity shares an of"ce with two other 
people. The Learning Communities of"ce is less crowded, and accordingly will act as a base for 
IDA development until such time as the degree is implemented, at which point administrative 
space will need to be found.] 

Sarah Bell: BA Advisor 

The BA program concept looks great! I think the practicum/co-op/mentorship pieces will be 
really appealing to students. One area I’m wondering about is the admissions side of things. 
Perhaps this is premature, but wanted to mention it just in case. Appendix D (P 23)- lists the 
BA requirements as: 6 credits of writing- will this be ENGL 1100 & ENGL 1202/1204? Would 
this be part of the student's "rst year in the BA? 

[Response: yes.] 

Page 24 mentions WRIT 1100- just wondering if this will be a new course? 

[Response: yes. The new course will be developed through consultations with the Task Force on 
English Requirements and the newly-forming Committee on Writing Intensive Courses.] 

In terms of entry points into the BA- were you looking at both "rst and third year admission? 
Currently students can apply for "rst year or third year entry into a BA program. Students 
entering year 1 of a BA program (directly from high school) require their English 12 with a B 
and Principles of Math 11 with a C. Will this be the case with the BA Inter Arts? 

[Response: yes.] 


Appendices 


Also, will there be media-related courses offered? The proposal mentions that this degree will 
prepare students to work in a media environment. 

[Response: yes. Many of the courses offered by the program include content related to media.] 

Thanks for the opportunity to read through your proposal....I’d like to take this program 
myself! 


Appendices 
Appendix B 
Library Assessment 


Appendices 


Summary Statement: 

Kwantlen University Library supports the development of a Bachelor of Arts, 
Interdisciplinary Arts. The current collections are quite strong. However, they were built in 
support of existing programs. Monographs, videos and DVDs would all require some 
upgrading and development in order to serve the proposed new courses. The library does 
recognize that several of the applied courses will not require a large number of new 
materials, but we are also mindful that core collections in various expressive modalities will 
need further growth in order to effectively support this degree. 

Previous Collection Development: 

Collection development in the areas covered by the proposed degree has revolved around the 
speci"cs of currently offered courses. 

Future Collection Needs: 

In order to provide materials appropriate to upper-level studies and research, future 
collection development will concentrate on proposed new upper-level courses. Collection 
development will focus on the areas not currently taught in existing courses as well as 
expanding and giving more depth to existing subject areas. 


Collection Development Obstacles: 

Funding: it is recommended that funding for library resources be continued and increased in 
order to build an excellent academic library collection appropriate to a University 
Time: Building an appropriate library collection will take place over a period of time. It is 
important that the Library continue to be involved in the development of new degrees in 
order that suf"cient preparation time is available for the planning and building of library 
collections. 

Total Estimated Annual Costs (Ongoing): $12,000 


Assessment prepared by Elaine Samwald 

(SSCC liaison Librarian - signature) 
Assessment reviewed by 


(University Librarian- signature) 


Appendices 


Appendix C 
Development Timetable 
. 
September 2009 Presentation of Concept Proposal 
to Curriculum Committees 
January 2010 
Spring 2010 
Spring 2011 
Presentation of Concept Proposal to Senate 
Full Degree Proposal development 
BA degree implementation 


Appendices 


Appendix D 

BA Requirements 

Learners will achieve the BA Interdisciplinary Arts degree by completing a minimum of 120 
credit hours with a cumulative grade point average of 2.0. In addition to satisfying all the 
essential requirements listed, learners must complete at least 65 of the 120 credit hours in arts 
subjects, and at least 45 credits must be taken at the upper levels (3000 or higher). 

The following requirements (essential to completing all Kwantlen general arts degree programs) 
are to be completed during the "rst 60 credits of study: 

Six-credit writing-intensive requirement. 

A minimum 9-credit quantitative requirement, at least 6 credits of which are to be completed 
within the "rst 60 credits taken. These 9 credits must include a minimum of 3 courses. 

To be listed as quantitative for the purposes of the Bachelor of Interdisciplinary Arts degree, 
courses must have quantitative reasoning (e.g., numerical, geometric, statistical, or 
probabilistic), or formal reasoning (e.g., mathematical or logically deductive), or scienti"c 
reasoning (involving the scienti"c method in general, and/or the methodology or content of a 
speci"c scienti"c discipline) as a basic principle in their primary subject matter. 

At least thee credits (i.e., one course) of the above 9 quantitative credits must be taken from 
courses offered by the Faculty of Science, Mathematics and Technology or School of 
Horticulture. 

A 24-credit breadth requirement, consisting of a minimum of one 1000-2000 level course in at 
least four separate social science or humanities disciplines outside of Creative Writing and 
Visual Arts. Courses identi"ed as liberal education and capstone courses also may be credited 
toward this requirement. 

IDEA 1100 and IDEA 2100, foundational courses in interdisciplinary philosophy and practice 
(IDEA 3100, a third-year summative course; and IDEA 4100, a fourth-year practicum course, 
must be completed in the "nal 60 credits). 

A second language to grade 11 or 6-credit post-secondary language requirement is required. 
(Learners who can demonstrate competency in a second language may have this requirement 
waived). 

In addition, learners must complete the following: 

A minimum of 120 credits, with at least 45 credits at the 3000 or 4000 levels. 

At least 60 credits at Kwantlen Polytechnic University 

(this requirement may be waived with approval of an advisor). 

The general progression of courses through the Interdisciplinary Arts BA is shown on the next 
page. 


Appendices 


Year One: 
IDEA 1100 (Interdisciplinary Explorations in the Arts) 
PSYC 1100 or PHIL 1100 
CRWR 1100 (Creative Writing) 
WRIT 1100 (writing-intensive; currently ENGL 1100) 
FINA 1120 (Visual Arts) 
FINA XXXX (Visual Arts) 
QUAN XXXX (Quantitative) 
BREA XXXX (Breadth) 
LCOM 1100 (Learning Communities) 
LLLL XXXX (Chosen by student; see note below) 

Year Two: 
IDEA 2100 (Interdisciplinary Arts) 
CRWR 2300 
CRWR XXXX 
FINA XXXX 
FINA XXXX 
CUST XXXX (Cultural Studies) 
QUAN XXXX 
BREA XXXX 
LLLL XXXX 
LLLL XXXX 

Year Three: 

IDEA 3100 
CRWR 3301 
CRWR XXXX 
FINA XXXX 
FINA XXXX 
CUST XXXX or PHIL 3040 
QUAN XXXX 
BREA XXXX 
LLLL XXXX 
LLLL XXXX 


Year Four: 

IDEA 4100 
CRWR XXXX 
CRWR XXXX 
FINA XXXX 
FINA XXXX 
FINA XXXX 
LCOM 4100 
CUST XXXX 
LLLL XXXX 
LLLL XXXX 


Note: LLLL credit requirements (L denotes learning) are broad, and include credit earned (with 
appropriate quali"cation, prerequisites, and access) from within any of the following: the 
Faculty of Humanities, the Faculty of Social Sciences, the Faculty of Community and Health 
Studies, the Centre for Design and Communications, the School of Horticulture. 


Appendices 


Appendix E 
Endorsements 



Appendices 


I would like to express my support for the development of a new Bachelor of Arts program 
that would be unique to British Columbia and seeks to integrate arts, culture and media. This is 
a truly innovative program, and as such is an important part of the emerging educational 
culture being fostered here in British Columbia. 

This new degree will enable graduates to combine a broad cultural education with practical 
workplace experience. I am pleased to support the development of a degree which will 
encourage future creative thinkers who are able to understand the role of culture in a variety of 
workplace settings. 

Another strength of this program is its ability to guarantee graduates practical work experience 
through the proposed practicum component. This practicum makes graduates of this program 
a valuable asset for future employers in a time of intensi"ed competition for jobs in the 
emerging workplace. 

I am proud to support Kwantlen Polytechnic University’s endeavours to innovatively serve our 
community by empowering future generations through education. 

Dianne Watts 
Mayor, City of Surrey 


Appendices 


Endorsements from Media, Industry, and Social Services 

In my 20 years of broadcasting at CKNW I have met many student interns who seem to have 
little understanding of the business and therefore are unsure of what it is they want to do. The 
various journalistic disciplines have been allowed to morph into the umbrella term "media" so 
that many entering the "eld appear to be unable to distinguish between propaganda, 
advertising or real news. I fault schools and ourselves for this. Any degree that brings with it an 
understanding of the real world in real time will be welcome. 

Philip Till 
Broadcaster 

I believe that this new degree is very important to those going into the work-a-day world that's 
upon us. I've always believed that a liberal arts education is often as important as a 
professional degree and both combined a very good note indeed on a Curriculum Vitae. This 
new degree will, it seems to me, be superior to the traditional "liberal" training. 

The world today has in every respect changed since I was at university and the degree 
proposed, integrating arts, culture, culture and media should amply arm the graduate for the 
battles ahead. 

Rafe Mair 
Broadcaster 

After 30 years of working as a professional writer, and having had to turn myself from a simple 
English major into a writer with multidisciplinary expertise, I'm delighted to "nally see a 
program that will provide a shorter route to the kind of versatility today's arts environment 
demands. 

Wayne Grady 
Chair, The Writers’ Union of Canada 


Appendices 


I think the proposed interdisciplinary arts degree would be a very valuable and useful tool for 
someone who plans to work in arts, culture or media, because the disciplines are so interlinked 
nowadays. Museum curators have to be technologically adept, as do the people who work for 
dance and theatre companies, and those who work in various media organizations. 

After I had trained as a print journalist in the 1960s, what I had learned about news reporting 
and writing was more than suf"cient for me to land a good job at a daily newspaper. Today, I 
would be woefully ill-prepared. I would still be able to handle the print demands of the job, but 
would lack the training necessary to provide audio, video and other website content that are 
now an integral part of every newspaper operation. 

I was able to specialize as an arts and entertainment writer because I had earned a teaching and 
performance degree as a musician and had also worked semi-professionally as an actor. 
However, I can see now that an interdisciplinary training program such as the one proposed for 
Kwantlen Polytechnic University would have been a much more ef"cient (and considerably less 
time-consuming) way for me to get to the same place. 

My daughter, who works as a junior high school teacher, is another example of someone who 
could have bene"ted greatly from an interdisciplinary training program. She was able to easily 
take on the challenge of involving the entire student population in a musical theatre production 
this past Christmas because she has both an education degree and a "ne arts degree, and she 
worked for ten years as a professional singer. With her varied background, she was able to 
show students how to run lights and sound, build props, and paint scenery if they did not have 
an aptitude for stage performing. But it took her a long time to acquire the skills needed to do 
a job like this. She, too, would have welcomed the opportunity to receive the kind of training 
that allows students to cross traditional disciplinary boundaries and thus be exposed to a wider 
range of in!uences and experiences. 

Brian Brennan 
Author, Journalist, Musician, Storyteller 
National Council, Writers’ Union of Canada 

The interdisciplinary degree program sounds like an excellent way of breaking out of the siloed 
sort of education many students receive. The world rewards—increasingly, it demands— broad, 
connected thinking, and the more Kwantlen can do to provide students with the tools and 
experience that encourage such thinking, the better. 

Gary Ross 
Editor, Vancouver Magazine 


Appendices 


This proposed new bachelor's degree in Interdisciplinary Arts does, at "rst blush, appear to be 
a wise response to the realities of our world in which young people are coming of age and 
"nding their feet. For too long, I have heard that people with a B.A. feel they have invested too 
much of their time, energy, and life in pigeonholed learning modes and niches which do not 
translate practicably into the world they will need to live and work in. 

This sounds like a winner to me. Any college really doing its homework to create a degree path 
like this will be "nding more and more students beating a path to its door. And, more 
importantly, those BA graduates of such a program will be more diversely and thoroughly 
"educated" (their potentials brought out) in ways more applicable to the world we're living in 
and that we'd like to live in. 

Kolyn Limworth 
Owner, banyen Books and Sound 

I work in the mobile games industry in an editing and proofreading job that practically requires 
an interdisciplinary background to do well. It isn't enough to have an English degree; not a 
week goes by that I don't pull from knowledge in a different area. Today I put my graphic 
design skills to use. Last week it was knowing that it was Socrates, and not Aristotle, who 
drank hemlock. Before that, testing a website and application and giving feedback on user 
experience. On a resume, my educational background looks like a mess, but it makes me 
uniquely suited for the position I am in. 

Yesterday, I found a site about game-based learning. There is no traditional academic degree 
that could adequately prepare a student for a job or a career in this; it is a mixture of writing, 
design, psychology, education, business, and technical ability. Some of the most exciting things 
we're learning today are coming not from going deeper into one "eld, but from fusing two or 
more "elds together. Psychologists and neuroscientists are learning from Buddhist monks. Tech 
companies are learning from neuroscience. I played a game the other night folding proteins to 
help discover new medical treatments, because humans still have an edge on computers. Yep, 
gaming and biochemistry -- who knew? This is where fresh, new knowledge and innovation 
are, not years down one narrow academic path. I just hope this can happen at Kwantlen in 
time for me to bene"t from it. 

Tierney Wisniewski 
Document Developer, NOKIA 


Appendices 


I am happy to write in support of the proposed new BA degree, which will allow students to 
take courses across a very wide spectrum of "elds. I know many master’s degree programs have 
recognized the usefulness of an interdisciplinary background and have offered this option at 
this level of education (at least at UBC). I am pleased to hear an interdisciplinary degree may be 
available to Kwantlen students at the undergraduate level. 

Coming from a varied background myself (BA in English, BSW and M.Ed. in Adult Education), 
I can appreciate a multidisciplinary approach to education. I think students "nishing this 
degree program would be much more appealing to future employers in a global economy 
rather than “specialists” in a speci"c "eld. I am in full support of this program. 

Rosemary Nygard 
Provincial Prevention Coordinator 
BC Responsible Gambling Strategy 

The degree program as described by Dr. Laird sounds very innovative. It's exactly the kind of 
thing we need in the post-secondary system in BC. My opinion is informed by an extensive 
background in human resources, knowing many young people complete Bachelor's degrees 
without developing skills needed to succeed in the workplace. I found this to be true with 
degrees in business and social service programming and my colleagues express similar views 
regarding degree programs in arts, media and culture. 

We work with individuals planning educational and employment goals and certainly, this is the 
type of programming we would encourage clients to research and consider. 

Margo O'Hara 
Managing Director 
HOPE Bridge Services 

Your concept of a degree in Interdisciplinary Arts is, I'm not surprised, de"nitely on the creative 
edge in education. What was of most interest to me was the practicum requirement because 
this "direct work experience" is precisely the bridge needed between studies and getting in 
there and being involved. Cultural organizations would leap at the opportunity to mentor 
students, keeping an eye out for individuals who can step in and keep right on going. 

Often we bring people together from various corners of the arts community to work together 
toward speci"c initiatives. Students in your degree program would already have a clear 
understanding of those various corners and would be, I strongly believe, valuable members of 
organizations and committees working in arts, culture, and media. As you say, "today's 
marketplace is tremendously...diverse"--it's great to give students an opportunity to lead in this 
current marketplace. 

Sylvia Gunnery 
Author 
National Council member 
The Writers' Union of Canada 


Appendices 


My "rst thought about this program was, “where was this when I needed it”. Second thought 
was, “Marshall McLuhan would love this.” Working across government and non-pro"t sectors 
for 20 years has clearly demonstrated, to me, the absolute necessity of being able to work from 
a multidisciplinary perspective. Our world is becoming more connected and that means 
diversity abounds. People entering the workforce unable to see, hear, feel and interpret 
information presented in multiple modes will and do struggle to keep up. Those with a varied 
knowledge base able to work from multiple perspectives will and do thrive. They bring added 
value to employers and have the advantage of being able to cross employment divides that so 
often box in the “experts.” 

Jamie Billingham 
HIV-AIDS Prevention Coordinator 
Addictions Counsellor 
Chilliwack Addiction & Prevention Services 
Paci!c Community Resources Society 

The B.A. in Interdisciplinary Arts is an incredible opportunity for students to gain exposure to 
a wealth of knowledge that will stand them in good stead as society increasingly requires a 
broad understanding of many disciplines. As they study the interconnections between art, 
psychology, media and culture, students will develop the skills to generate novel ideas and think 
critically as well as discover what interests them the most. This program provides practical 
experience in the world of work and the opportunity to develop relationships that will enhance 
their careers. A degree such as this would result in an excellent base of knowledge from which 
to pursue a wide range of graduate studies. I wish a degree like this had been available to me, 
as I have a great deal of interest in music, creative writing, psychology, anthropology, and 
history. Who knows what possibilities would have opened up for me. Please allow other 
students to have an educational experience that would ignite their passion for all that the 
human experience has to offer. 

Sara Lapsley 
Counsellor 
Dual Diagnosis Project 
Vancouver Coastal Health 


Appendices 


Endorsements from The Educational Sector 

I am excited to hear about the potential new degree program in Interdisciplinary Studies in the 
Arts, Culture, and Media. As the chair of an interdisciplinary Masters degree program at a 
university that has had a strong commitment to the role of interdisciplinary studies for over 
150 years, I believe such degree programs provide a rich learning experience and a vital 
component to a students ability to work in a world that is constantly changing. As we see the 
formal boundaries of disciplines be challenged by new and unique work environments, such a 
degree may well make the difference for future careers as well as future graduate studies. 
Kudos to Kwantlen Polytechnic University for taking the leap! 

Ned Farley, Ph.D. 
Editor, Journal of LGBT Issues in Counseling 
Chair, Mental Health Counseling Program 
Chair, Integrative Studies Program 
School of Applied Psychology, Counseling, and Family Therapy 
Antioch University Seattle 

The new degree program that you are designing at Kwantlen Polytechnic University sounds 
very interesting, Here at the Kutenai Art Therapy Institute we have identi"ed the need for an 
integrated undergraduate degree and courses that would prepare a student to enter into art 
therapy training at the graduate level. 

Monica Carpendale, BFA, DVATI, RCAT, BCATR 
Executive Director 
Kutenai Art Therapy Institute 

I "nd this program at Kwantlen Polytechnic University to be very intriguing and I know that a 
lot of our students would be keen to pursue such a diverse and pragmatic course. We encourage 
our students to explore a number of different disciplines at Southridge and try to make links 
between the core themes and competencies. This program would be a natural extension of that. 

Marc Ayotte 
Head of Senior School 
Southridge School 


Appendices 


I am writing this letter to offer excitement and support for the proposed Bachelor of 
Interdisciplinary Arts at Kwantlen Polytechnic University. As the director at the Vancouver Art 
Therapy Institute (VATI), I recognize the value that such a degree would have as a precursor to 
our graduate level diploma program. 

VATI is a recognized training facility by the Canadian Art Therapy Association, and we train 
art therapists using a meta-theoretical, client-centred approach. Although VATI certainly 
recognizes, appreciates, and utilizes the historical foundation of the Institute as being 
psychology-focused, and psychodynamic in approach, we contemporarily incorporate theories 
and approaches from a much broader paradigm. Our curriculum challenges students to 
advance their therapeutic values and practical approaches through different lenses. We look to 
anthropology, aesthetic theory, social action, and critical theory to encourage students to 
become more aware of themselves and their clients in the therapeutic frame. Our students see 
how social policy and and theory affect human beings, and whole communities through their 
practicum experiences. 

An undergraduate degree that is designed to challenge students to think critically, with breadth, 
depth, and application in interdisciplinary arts is an innovative and essential development. At 
VATI, we look for applicants who are not only creative and intelligent, but who can also show 
us that they can apply their skills and knowledge in thoughtful and meaningful ways. Learning 
to become an art therapist is an incredibly challenging journey, and I think that this 
undergraduate degree would prepare students very well for the VATI program. 

On a personal note, this program looks like something that I would have wanted to take, had 
the opportunity existed at the time when I was graduating from high school. It took me a long 
time to come to the "eld of art therapy. I started my undergraduate degree in the sciences, 
because it was not clear that there were many real applications to a more creative path. 
Although I found academic success in the sciences, there was no room for my creative passions 
to thrive. Eventually, I landed into anthropology and "nally art therapy. I think that the 
different facets of an interdisciplinary arts program that includes so many options, including a 
practicum component, would have made my decision to enter an arts related undergraduate 
degree a much less dif"cult one than it was. 

Sarah Van Norman 
Director 
Vancouver Art Therapy Institute 
350-1425 Marine Drive 
West Vancouver, BC 


Appendices 


Endorsements from Kwantlen Students 

Student 1: 

It's exciting to hear that Kwantlen is considering an Interdisciplinary Arts BA program. I hope 
that I'm not too far along in my studies to be able to take advantage of it. I think it would 
de"nitely be a practical and valuable program for anyone to take. After all, the line between 
disciplines blur in the real world. 

As an artist and a writer, I believe an interdisciplinary degree would be especially useful since 
I've discovered that these practices are not only about craft, culture, and aesthetics, but also 
require understanding in psychology, history, mythology, science – or any other area being 
explored. A breadth of 
knowledge creates a foundation for any kind of creative or artistic communication to be 
properly received as something to be respected or valued. The key is to "gure out how they all 
bridge together in a practical way. So I'm especially interested in the practicum component. 
Theory alone can't teach what experience has to offer. 

I've also got a fair amount of life experience and tend to observe and analyze the world. For 
example, look at the "lm industry. I often think how diverse the knowledge base must be for 
those producing a "lm. The stories we see on the big screen involve such a plethora of resources 
to 
make them come alive for the viewer. I've always been fascinated and in awe by these complex 
ideas. I realize large groups of people with different expertise work together on movie 
productions. Yet someone has to have a vision for the "nished product. Someone needs to have 
at least a basic yet vast knowledge base of all the parts required for making it complete. 
Interdisciplinary work is being able to look at the big picture. I believe an interdisciplinary 
degree will help create leaders. 

Student 2: 

I was "rst introduced to the Interdisciplinary Expressive Arts courses at Kwantlen Polytechnic 
University by a student who had recently taken these courses. Being a Psychiatric Nursing 
student, I was very interested in learning more about courses that promote such creative 
expression and personal exploration. I have witnessed both in psychiatric settings, and through 
personal experience, the many therapeutic bene"ts of expanding one’s creative side through 
several outlets, be it music, "ne arts, photography, or writing, and this course seems to promote 
just that. Upon graduation I hope my practice will involve working with youth while 
incorporating the creative and therapeutic interventions I will have learned through 
Interdisciplinary Expressive Arts courses at Kwantlen. 


Appendices 


Student 3: 

A Bachelor of Arts degree in Interdisciplinary Arts is a necessary and intelligent choice on the 
part of Kwantlen Polytechnic University. In fact, it is most de"nitely "tting to have such a 
degree offered in a school that proclaims in its title that it possesses “many arts.” This should 
be a !agship degree for Kwantlen as it is unique and unlike anything else offered by other 
British Columbian universities, and why not? Kwantlen is a unique university wherein a degree 
such as this could thrive. Why focus on a speci"c major when you could challenge yourself 
academically and creatively on a multitude of courses that fall under the umbrella of 
interdisciplinarity? This degree could encapsulate and amalgamate the full university 
experience, as courses would constantly be re-inventing themselves depending upon both the 
subject matter of the lesson and the students involved. 

The IDEA courses I completed during my time at Kwantlen rank among some of my 
favourite courses at University. Although a great deal of this has to be attributed to the 
professor, Dr. Ross Laird, the interesting characteristics and dynamics presented from the 
students also helped. The body of students was made up of different backgrounds, both 
academically and culturally, which allowed the class as a whole to get a better understanding of 
numerous different aspects. These classes were never monotonous, because quite simply, they 
did not have the time to be. One week we could be focusing on the Egyptian culture, travel 
stories and yoga, while the next would be a "eld trip to Science World. Also, unlike “normal” 
classes which are simply based in a classroom, campus exploration was required from time to 
time, whether it be to !y a kite which we built in class, or to discover an object to write a 
found poem about. 

The IDEA and Mythological Narratives classes offered at Kwantlen pushed me to 
create some of my "nest work at the University level. I managed to create several projects I am 
very proud of by myself as well as one major "lm project with two other students, that 
exceeded what I thought I could possibly do. It was an interesting and fruitful journey the 
entire way. An Interdisciplinary Arts degree would be an excellent addition to the growing 
University I am so proud to have attended. 


Appendices 


Appendix F 
Report from Institutional Analysis and Planning 



Appendices 


The report from Kwantlen’s Of"ce of Institutional Analysis and Planninng (IAP) was completed 
in September, 2009. The full text of the report (sans appendices) is included below, along with 
responses (from the IDA development group) to various items. 

Report from the Office of Institutional Analysis and Planning 

The Bachelor of Arts, Interdisciplinary Arts Major degree program proposal was reviewed by 
the Of"ce of Institutional Analysis and Planning August - September 2009. The present 
document presents the key "ndings. 

In general, the data and other information the Of"ce of Institutional Analysis & Planning 
provides are designed to provide a gauge of the practicability of the program from the 
perspective of its ability to attract suf"cient students, and to suggest potential ways of 
improving its viability. This report consists of four main sections: 1) Competitive Environment, 
2) Student Demand, 3) Labour Market Demand, and 4) General Comments. Please note that 
the website links to the articles, studies, and reports included in this report are provided on 
page 16. 

Response: 

The report offers much commentary regarding the perceived (by the report’s authors) practicality 
of the program, but the report does not contain any suggestions for improving the viability of the 
proposed program. 

Additionally – and importantly – the report does not mention the crucial importance of the IDA 
program’s adherence to, and support of, Kwantlen’s fundamental mandate to be a polytechnic (and 
therefore interdisciplinary) university. This seems a curious oversight, given that the purpose of the 
IAP office is to “analyze, prepare and disseminate comprehensive, current and authoritative data 
and information about the institution and post-secondary sector, and provide strategic information 
related to the institution's mission, goals and planning” (IAP website). 

In Kwantlen’s (currently evolving) Mission and Mandate document, the principles embraced by the 
IDA degree proposal (interdisciplinarity, mentorship, community engagement, cross-discipline 
collaborations, etc.) are repeatedly emphasized. The IDA proposal supports, and is completely 
consistent with, Kwantlen’s direction as an institution. This consistency is perhaps the most 
important aspect of the degree proposal, and its omission from the IAP report is unfortunate. 


Appendices 


1. Competitive Environment 
The purpose of this section is to identify Canadian postsecondary education institutions 
offering degrees similar to the proposed degree. This section, when available, includes a table 
summarizing the enrolment data of each institution with the same or similar degree. 

Attached to this report are two articles: the "rst article discusses the future of interdisciplinary 
studies and the second article provides information on employment prospects of individuals 
with an interdisciplinary studies degree. The table below provides a comprehensive list of the 
Canadian postsecondary education institutions offering degrees in interdisciplinary studies. 

Table 1: Undergraduate and Graduate Programs in Interdisciplinary Studies 

Province Institution Program Co-Op Discipline 
Undergraduate Level 
Certi"cate/Diploma 
BC Kwantlen 
Polytechnic 
University 
Certi"cate in 
Interdisciplinary Design 
Studies 
No Design and Visual 
Communications, 
General 
MB University of 
Manitoba 
General Management Interdisciplinary 
Studies 
No Management 
Science, General 
ON Algoma University Certi"cate in 
Interdisciplinary 
Aboriginal Learning 
No Aboriginal 
Education 
ON Lakehead University Interdisciplinary Dementia 
Studies 
No Adult Development 
and Aging 
ON Lakehead University Interdisciplinary 
Certi"cate in Palliative 
Care 
No Health Professions 
and Related Clinical 
Sciences, Other 
SK First Nations 
University of 
Canada 
Diploma of First Nations 
Inter-disciplinary Studies 
No Aboriginal Studies 
SK First Nations 
University of 
Canada 
Diploma of First Nations 
Inter-disciplinary Studies 
in Justice 
No Criminal 
Justice/Safety 
Studies 
SK University of Regina Diploma in First Nations 
Inter-disciplinary Studies 
(community-based justice, 
health, and cultural 
development) 
No Aboriginal Studies 
SK University of Regina Certi"cate of Continuing 
Education First Nations 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
No Aboriginal Studies, 
Multidisciplinary/In 
ter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
Province Institution Program Co-Op Discipline 


Appendices 


Province Institution Program Co-Op Discipline 
Bachelor’s Degree 
BC The University of 
British Columbia 
Bachelor of Arts in 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
(Vancouver) 
No Multidisciplinary/In 
ter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
BC The University of 
British Columbia 
Bachelor of Fine Arts in 
Interdisciplinary 
Performance/ Theatre 
(Okanagan) 
No Drama and 
Dramatics/ Theatre 
Arts, General 
BC The University of 
British Columbia 
Bachelor of Human 
Kinetics (Vancouver) Interdisciplinary 
Studies 
No Kinesiology and 
Exercise Science 
BC Thompson Rivers 
University 
Bachelor of 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
(BIS) 
No Multidisciplinary/In 
ter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
AB University of 
Alberta 
BA with major in 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
(Global and Development 
Studies Stream) 
No International/Global 
Studies 
AB University of 
Alberta 
BA in Interdisciplinary 
Studies 
No Multidisciplinary/In 
ter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
MB The University of 
Winnipeg 
BA (4-year Honours) in 
Interdisciplinary 
Linguistics 
No Linguistics 
MB The University of 
Winnipeg 
BA (3-year) in 
Interdisciplinary 
Linguistics 
No Linguistics 
NB University of New 
Brunswick 
Bachelor of Philosophy in 
Interdisciplinary 
Leadership Studies 
No Philosophy 
NB St. Thomas 
University 
BA with Interdisciplinary 
Major 
No Multidisciplinary/In 
ter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
NS Nova Scotia College 
of Art and Design 
Bachelor of Design with 
Major in Interdisciplinary 
Design 
No Design and Visual 
Communications, 
General 
ON Carleton University BA in French 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
(Honours) 
No French Language 
and Literature, 
General 
ON Carleton University BA in Directed 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
(General) 
No Multidisciplinary/In 
ter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
ON Carleton University BA in directed 
interdisciplinary Studies 
(Honours) 
No Multidisciplinary/In 
ter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
ON University of 
Toronto 
BA in Health Studies 
(Interdisciplinary Major, 
Minor) 
Yes Health 
Services/Allied 
Health/Health 
Sciences, General 


Appendices 


Province Institution Program Co-Op Discipline 
ON University of 
Toronto 
BSc in Health Studies 
(Interdisciplinary Major) 
Yes Health 
Services/Allied 
Health/Health 
Sciences, General 
ON University of 
Toronto 
BA in International 
Studies (Interdisciplinary 
Major) 
Yes International/Global 
Studies 
ON University of 
Windsor 
BA general in 
interdisciplinary Studies 
No Multidisciplinary/In 
ter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 


Appendices 


Province Institution Program Co-Op Discipline 
Graduate Level 
Master’s Degree 
BC The University of 
British Columbia 
Master of Arts in 
Interdisciplinary Graduate 
Studies (Okanagan) 
No Education, 
Fine/Studio Arts, 
General, Multidisciplinary/
Interdisciplinary 
Studies, Other 
BC The University of 
British Columbia 
Master of Arts in 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
(Vancouver) 
No Multidisciplinary/I 
nter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
BC The University of 
British Columbia 
Master of Science in 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
(Vancouver) 
No Multidisciplinary/I 
nter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
BC The University of 
British Columbia 
Master of Science in 
Interdisciplinary Graduate 
Studies (Okanagan) 
No Multidisciplinary/I 
nter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
BC University of 
Northern British 
Columbia 
Master of Arts in 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
No Multidisciplinary/I 
nter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
BC University of 
Northern British 
Columbia 
Master of Science in 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
No Multidisciplinary/I 
nter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
BC Royal Roads 
University 
Master of Arts in 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
No Multidisciplinary/I 
nter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
BC Trinity Western 
University 
Master of Arts in 
Interdisciplinary 
Humanities 
No Humanities/Huma 
nistic Studies, 
Multidisciplinary/ 
Interdisciplinary 
Studies, Other 
AB University of 
Calgary 
Master of Arts in the 
Interdisciplinary Graduate 
Program 
No Multidisciplinary/I 
nter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
NB University of New 
Brunswick 
Master of Arts in 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
No Multidisciplinary/I 
nter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
ON Ontario College of 
Art & Design 
Interdisciplinary Master's 
in Art, Media, and Design 
No Art/Art Studies, 
Design and Visual 
Communications, 
General 
ON York University Master of Arts in 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
No Multidisciplinary/I 
nter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 
SK University of Regina Master of Fine Arts in 
Interdisciplinary Studies 
Yes Art/Art Studies, 
Fine/ Studio Arts, 
General, 
Multidisciplinary/I 
nter-disciplinary 
Studies, Other 


Appendices 


SK University of Regina Master of Arts in 
Interdisciplinary Studies in 
Fine Arts 
Yes Fine/Studio Arts, 
General 
Source: Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada 
The fact that the program proposal refers to the concept of “Art Therapy” and “Expressive Art 
Therapies” on several occasions and that students of the degree are required to take four 
courses in interdisciplinary expressive arts (please see Appendix D of the program proposal) 
necessitate the inclusion of information on Art Therapy programs offered within Canada. 

Response: 

The four IDEA courses are not focused speci!cally on art therapy or expressive arts therapies (which 
are, in fact, two distinct !elds). The IDEA courses are broad, interdisciplinary courses with many 
aspects and activities. Moreover, the two new courses to be developed for the full degree proposal 
(IDEA 1100 and IDEA 2100), and the two existing courses (IDEA 3100 and IDEA 4100) will be 
rebranded in terms of their titles (though not their content). These courses will be titled 
Interdisciplinary Explorations in the Arts. The IDEA acronym is crucial as a branding mechanism for 
the degree. 

Please note that “in Canada a Bachelor of Arts (art and psychology courses are recommended) 
is required before entering one of the Art Therapy programs. These programs include postgraduate 
diplomas, graduate diplomas, and Master's degree programs” (The Canadian Art 
Therapy Association). Table 2 provides a list of the Canadian public and private institutions 
offering post-bachelor’s programs in Art Therapy. 


Appendices 


Table 2: Art Therapy Programs 

Province Institution Program Program Level Co-
Op Discipline 
AB Athabasca 
University 
Master of 
Counselling 
Master’s Degree No Art 
Therapy/Therapist 
Counselling 
Psychology 
Counsellor, 
Education/School 
Counselling and 
Guidance Services, 
Vocational Rehabilitation 
Counselling/Counse 
llor 
QC Concordia 
University 
Master of Arts 
in Creative Arts 
Master’s Degree No Art 
Therapy/Therapist 
Province Private 
Institution Program Program Level Co-
Op Discipline 
BC BC School of 
Art Therapy 
(Victoria) 
Diploma 
Program in Art 
Therapy 
Post-bachelor’s N/A Art Therapy 
BC Vancouver 
Art Therapy 
Institute 
Diploma 
Program in 
Art Therapy 
Post-bachelor’s N/A Art Therapy 
BC Kutenai Art 
Therapy 
Institute 
(Nelson) 
Diploma 
Program in 
Art Therapy 
Post-bachelor’s N/A Art Therapy 
BC Adler School 
of 
Professional 
Psychology 
(Vancouver) 
Master’s of 
Arts in 
Counselling 
Psychology: Art 
Therapy 
Master’s Level N/A Counselling/Art 
Therapy 
ON Toronto Art 
Therapy 
Institute 
Diploma 
Program in Art 
Therapy 
Post-bachelor’s N/A Art Therapy 
Please note: the BC School of Art Therapy, the Justice Institute of BC, Langara College, and 
Douglas College offer workshops related to Expressive Arts. 

Sources: Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada, and, the British Columbia Art 
Therapy Association 

Response: 

The Vancouver Art Therapy Institute is the most popular destination for learners in BC to pursue 
certi!cation in Art Therapy. The VATI program is laddered with the Athabasca program (for those 
seeking a Master’s degree). The Adler School does not offer a Masters level program in BC (learners 
must go to Chicago). 


Appendices 


In National Occupational Classi"cation, art therapists are classi"ed under the category “Other 
Professional Occupations in Therapy and Assessment” (NOC 3144). This category also 
includes drama, athletic, recreational, music, and movement therapists, art therapy consultants, 
remedial gymnasts, and dance-movement therapy researchers. In 2007, 1,037 students were 
enrolled in programs leading to one of the aforementioned professions at private institutions in 
BC and 696 of these students graduated the same year. 

The Department of Continuing Studies at The University of Western Ontario offers a diploma 
program in Arts Management. 

Table 3: Diploma Program in Arts Management 

Provinc 
e Institution Program Program Level Co-
Op Discipline 
ON The University 
of Western 
Ontario 
Diploma in Arts 
Management 
Post-bachelor’s No Arts 
Management 

Source: Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada 

Appended to this report are documents containing information on the de"nition of art therapy 
and its history in Canada, education requirements of art therapists, and education standards 
for programs providing graduate level degrees in art therapy. 

Response: 

The IDA proposal offers a much broader suite of educational and career options than simply those 
seeking further training in art therapy. As indicated on pages 9, 15, and 17, the proposed degree 
offers many pathways including social and cultural services; mental health services; community 
health and development; arts advocacy and development; cultural advocacy and development; 
primary and secondary education; counselling; personal and professional development; 
professional arts (writing, visual arts, music, etc.); religious studies; recreational therapies; arts 
research; arts performance; arts and craft professionals. 

Some prospective learners will be those considering a career in expressive arts therapies with the 
MA in Expressive Arts Therapies, MA in Counselling Psychology, or MA in Art Therapy as their 
terminal degree. Typically, such learners enroll in BA programs in Psychology, Visual Arts, Creative 
Writing, Social Work, Theatre, Music, or English Literature. These programs are chosen by such 
learners as default replacements for their intended program – Expressive Arts Therapies – which is 
not currently available in BC. The BA, Interdisciplinary Arts Major will fully prepare such students 
with the educational background and credentials for entry to graduate training in Expressive Arts 
Therapies. In fact, completion of the BA Interdisciplinary Arts will provide learners with the credits 
required to apply for admission to every graduate program in Expressive Arts Therapies in Canada 
and almost all such programs in the United States. Moreover, conversations are underway with 
graduate-level training programs in British Columbia to offer preferred entry for graduates of the 
Interdisciplinary Arts Major. (One such preferred-entry agreement has already been completed, in 
principle, with the Vancouver Art Therapy Institute, the main program in Art Therapy in British 
Columbia.) 


Appendices 


2. Student Demand 
The aim of this section is to explore the extent of student demand for the proposed degree by 
mainly examining the historic participation rates in similar degree programs. 

Kwantlen Polytechnic University offers the following degrees in Bachelor of Arts: 

Bachelor of Arts: Double Minor 
Bachelor of Arts: Minor in Anthropology 
Bachelor of Arts: Minor in Creative Writing 
Bachelor of Arts: Minor in Criminology 
Bachelor of Arts: Minor in Economics 
Bachelor of Arts: Minor in English 
Bachelor of Arts: Minor in Geography 
Bachelor of Arts: Minor in History 
Bachelor of Arts: Minor in Mathematics 
Bachelor of Arts: Minor in Philosophy 
Bachelor of Arts: Minor in Political Science 
Bachelor of Arts: Minor in Psychology 
Bachelor of Arts: Minor in Sociology 
Bachelor of Arts in English 
Bachelor of Arts in General Studies 


Enrolments in the Faculty of Arts programs at Kwantlen increased by 1.5% over the three year 
period from 2005/06 to 2007/08. Of the students in the Faculty of Arts, 6% were working 
towards a Bachelor’s Degree in Arts in the 2005/06 Academic Year and 12% in the 2007/08 
Academic Year. 

Table 4: Faculty of Arts Registrant Counts by Degree Level 

Degree Level 
Academic Year 
2005/0 
6 
2006/0 
7 
2007/0 
8 
Associate Degree 4,942 4,959 5,002 
Bachelor’s Degree 405 666 821 
Certi"cate 151 164 161 
Diploma 933 683 540 
Unspeci"ed 117 226 332 
Total 6,548 6,698 6,856 

Source: 2005/06 to 2007/08 Academic Year Comparison Report: Registrant Count by College 
and Degree Level of Program 

Students of the proposed degree program are required to complete four interdisciplinary 
expressive arts courses, which are IDEA 1100, IDEA 2100, IDEA 3100, and IDEA 4100. Table 
5 presents the enrolments in two of the IDEA courses that have been offered at Kwantlen since 
Fall 2008. 


Appendices 


Table 5: Kwantlen Polytechnic University: Number of 
Registrants in Interdisciplinary Expressive Arts Courses 

Fall Fall 
2008 Spring 2009 2009 
IDEA 
3100 26 18* 
IDEA 
4100 28 

*As of September 17th, 2009. 
Source: Kwantlen's Internal Data Warehouse 


Credentials Awarded in 2006 and 2007 Calendar Years 

Research Universities 

Between the 2006 and 2007 calendar years, the increase in the number of Bachelor of Arts 
degrees awarded by the research universities in British Columbia was 2% (See Table 6). Within 
this number, 50 credentials were awarded in Multidisciplinary and Interdisciplinary Studies in 
2006 and 53 in 2007 (see Table 7). 

Table 6: 
Number of Bachelor of Arts Degrees Awarded by BC Research Universities 

RRU SFU TRU 
UBC 
Okanag 
an 
UBC 
Vancouv 
er UNBC UVIC Total 
200 
7 88 2,500 106 233 2,147 163 1,217 6,454 
200 
6 113 2,321 133 176 2,131 153 1,290 6,317 

Source: British Columbia Higher Education Accountability Dataset 

Table 7: Bachelor of Arts Degrees Awarded in Multidisciplinary and Interdisciplinary 
Studies 

RRU SFU TRU 
UBC 
Okanag 
an 
UBC 
Vancouv 
er UNBC UVIC Total 
200 
7 0 8 0 0 16 28 1 53 
200 
6 0 13 0 0 10 27 0 50 

Source: British Columbia Higher Education Accountability Dataset 

Table 8: 
Bachelor of Arts Degrees Awarded in Liberal Arts and Sciences, General Studies, 
and Humanities 

RRU SFU TRU 
UBC 
Okanag 
an 
UBC 
Vancouv 
er UNBC UVIC Total 
200 
7 0 300 6 10 82 14 1 413 
200 
6 0 259 70 5 82 11 6 433 

Source: British Columbia Higher Education Accountability Dataset 



Appendices 


Non-Research Universities 

Credential data in a comparable format is not currently available for non-research universities. 
The Ministry of Advanced Education and Labour Market Development plans to introduce the 
"rst system-wide credential table (including both research and non-research universities) later 
this year. 

Response: 

This section of the IAP report is based solely on “historic participation rates in similar degree 
programs” and does not actually say anything about student demand for the IDA degree at 
Kwantlen. Demand (both internally and externally) for the IDA degree has been high (see 
endorsements in Appendices A and E). Between September 15 and October 1, the Kwantlen 
UserVoice system registered 50 additional learner endorsements. Moreover, the numbers shown 
above for other institutions do not re$ect the fact that Kwantlen is the only university in BC with a 
speci!c, legislated mandate for interdisciplinarity. The comparisons above, therefore, are somewhat 
misleading. The !gures show BA degrees in both the multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary areas 
(though these areas are not the same), but they cannot show degrees earned from BC universities 
with speci!c interdisciplinary mandates, because such degrees do not exist – and cannot exist until 
Kwantlen offers them. 


Appendices 


57 


3. Labour Market Demand 
The purpose of this section is to provide an informed view of the labour market trends in BC and 
Canada for all the occupational groups that fall under the postsecondary "eld of study of the proposed 
degree. 

Occupational Pro"les (attached) 

Canada 
Managers in Art, Culture, Recreation, and Sport (NOC 051) 
Family, Marriage, and Other Related Counsellors (NOC 4153) 
Therapy and Assessment Professionals (NOC 314) 
Community and Social Service Workers (NOC 4212) 
Source: Job Futures, Service Canada 

The occupational pro"les listed above include a section on the educational requirements of the 
occupation(s). Please note that interdisciplinary arts degrees are not listed among the required/related 
educational programs; therefore, students with a degree in interdisciplinary arts may need further 
education and training in order to work in any of these "elds. 

British Columbia 
Recreation, Sports, and Fitness Program and Service Directors (NOC 0513)* 
Library, Archive, Museum, and Art Gallery Managers (NOC 0511)* 
Family, Marriage, and Other Related Counsellors (NOC 4153) 
Other Professional Occupations in Therapy and Assessment (NOC 3144)** 
Community and Social Service Workers (NOC 4212) 
Source: BC Work Futures 

*These two categories are the subcategories of NOC 051, Managers in Art, Culture, Recreation, and 
Sport. 
** This category is a subcategory of NOC 314, Therapy and Assessment Professionals. 



Appendices 


58 


4. General Comments 
Co-op and practicum opportunities involving regional industry partners enrich students’ 
education by allowing them to apply what they have learned in the classroom to real-life 
situations and let them gain necessary employment skills required in today’s fast changing work 
environment prior to graduation. Moreover, the institution enhances its visibility and reputation 
within its community through the co-op placement and practicum interactions with the regional 
organizations. 

In the executive summary of the program proposal, it was indicated that the students of this new 
degree will be provided with “workplace experience through a comprehensive practicum, co-op 
and mentorship program that will facilitate their entry into the professional sphere” (p. 4). On 
page 15 of the proposal, it was said that “from the beginning of their involvement with the 
Interdisciplinary Arts program, learners will start to build bridges to community employers.” 
However, there is no mention of the kind of co-op and practicum opportunities that will be 
available to the students of this degree in the program proposal. 

Response: 

As indicated in the proposal, learners will use IDEA 4100 as a practicum course, with a speci!c, 
pedagogically-driven structure of community placement and mentor review. Learners will 
demonstrate their learning by way of assessment by a panel of peers, community mentors, and 
faculty advisors. 

“Learners…will be able to choose educational pathways to best suit their needs. Multiple entry 

points and bridging opportunities will re!ect…” (p. 4). The curriculum of the proposed degree 

lacks !exibility since it only permits students to take two elective courses per academic year. 

There does not seem to be much room for students of the degree program to develop their own 

educational pathways. 

Response: 

The above statement is incorrect. In the IDA degree, learners choose 12 customized credits in the !rst 
year and 24 credits per year in the subsequent three years, for a total of 84 learner-chosen credits. 

“…the degree will serve regional needs…” (p. 5), “The Interdisciplinary Arts program will be 

both comprehensive and responsive to the needs of community and industry” (p. 6). What 

exactly are the regional needs that were repeatedly mentioned in the executive summary and in 

several sections of the program proposal? 

Response: 

The regional needs served by the IDA program are consistent with Kwantlen’s mandate to serve 
regional needs, as outlined in the Mission and Mandate document. These needs are articulated in 
various institutional documents, policies, and statements; speci!cally, the needs of learner in the 
South Fraser region. Serving these needs is fundamental to Kwantlen’s purpose. 


Appendices 


59 


The program proposal includes anecdotal evidence from professionals established in different 
"elds supporting the proposed degree and some of the important results of the Statistics Canada 
2006 Census report, “A Statistical Pro"le of Artists in Canada.” Following are some of the 
highlights of the Statistics Canada report which were not included in the degree proposal: 


The average earnings of artists are well below the overall labour force average in every province. 
A typical artist in Canada earns less than half the typical earnings of all Canadian workers. 
Artists’ earnings decreased, even before the current recession. 
There are more female than male artists, yet women artists earn much less than men. 
Aboriginal and visible minority artists have particularly low earnings. 
Economic returns to higher education are much lower for artists than for other workers. 
There are relatively few opportunities for full-time work in the arts. 
There has been substantial growth in the number of artists since 1971, but the rate of growth is 
decreasing. 


Response: 

It is an unfortunate reality that the incomes of many professions are higher than those for arts 
professions. And it is also unfortunate that gender inequities exist. Perhaps the Kwantlen IDA degree 
can help to improve this situation, by assisting those learners who are interested in arts professions 
to develop careers which are more economically rewarding and gender-balanced. Pursuing such 
goals is a fundamental aspect of the degree. 

Please note the arts occupations included in the analysis of the Statistics Canada report are 
“actors and comedians, artisans and craft persons, authors and writers, conductors, composers, 
and arrangers, dancers, musicians and singers, other performers, painters, sculptors and other 
visual artists, and producers, directors, choreographers, and related occupations” (A Statistical 
Pro"le of Artists In Canada, February 2009, p. 1). The proposed program intends to provide a 
more diverse range of occupational opportunities (please refer to Learner Pro"le on page 8 of the 
program proposal). 

Response: 

This is correct. 


Appendices 


60 


What is the impact of decreased funding levels for the Arts & Cultural sector in BC on graduates 
of the proposed program? 

Response: 

The arts and culture sector consistently struggles with funding in part because of the lack of 
institutional support from government (and, by extension, from public educational institutions). 
Kwantlen’s IDA degree would be a major step in helping to ameliorate this situation in BC. 

“Others will choose the Interdisciplinary Arts program after completing a Trades diploma at 
Kwantlen” (p. 6). Why are students from a Trades program within Kwantlen more likely to join 
this program? How will trades students bridge into the program? 

Response: 

This aspect of the program is still in development, but is intended to build upon the model 
developed by the School of Business in which a learner who completes two years of trades can 
ladder into the Entrepreneurial Business Leadership program. 

“Additionally, planned cross-disciplinary linkages between the Interdisciplinary Arts program 
and Kwantlen Trades and Technology programs will enable trades and technology learners who 
complete diplomas and certi"cates to continue on to degree completion with the 
Interdisciplinary Arts Major” (p. 9). What are the planned cross-disciplinary linkages? 

Response: 

Please see the previous response. 

On page 7 of the program proposal, interdisciplinary expressive arts (IDEA) courses are 
identi"ed as the capstone courses. Students of the proposed program are required to take four 
IDEA courses. What is the reason for the requirement to complete four IDEA courses? Please 
note: the entry-level education requirement to become an art therapist is a Master’s degree. 

Response: 

The IDA degree is not an art therapy degree. The IDEA courses exist to provide learner engagement, 
mentorship, teaching in interdisciplinarity, and practicum experience. The courses provide a 
structured means of creating a community of learning, of assisting learners in developing their 
educational pathways, and of helping learners to !nd the purpose and meaning of their educational 
journey. 


Appendices 


61 


“Multiple modes of learning across multiple campuses will enhance the program’s accessibility 
and desirability for many learners” (p. 6), “…the structure of the program will embrace part-
time, evening, and weekend delivery methods. …Many courses will be offered online or mixed 
mode” (p. 8). The program proposal identi"ed several different delivery methods: part-time, 
evening, and weekend. Will courses also be offered during the day in the week? According to the 
program proposal (p. 8), courses will be offered face-to-face, online, and in a mixed-mode 
format, which blends online and face-to-face learning. Looking at the forecasted yearly 
enrolment, which is 35 students per year, it may not be feasible to use multiple delivery methods. 

Response: 

Courses will be offered to suit learner needs. 

“Some prospective learners will be those considering a career in expressive arts therapies with 
the MA in Expressive Arts Therapies, MA in Counselling Psychology, or MA in Art Therapy as 
their terminal degree” (p. 8). According to the Association of Universities and Colleges of 
Canada, an MA degree in Expressive Arts Therapies or in Art Therapy is not being offered at any 
of the public postsecondary institutions in Canada. Three universities in BC and ten public 
universities in other provinces offer a Master’s degree in Counselling Psychology. 

Table 9: BC Institutions Offering Master’s Degrees in Counselling Psychology 

Province Institute Program Co-op Discipline 
BC The University 
of British 
Columbia 
MEd in Counselling 
Psychology (Vancouver) 
No Counselling 
Psychology 
BC Simon Fraser 
University 
MEd in Counselling 
Psychology 
No Counselling 
Psychology 
BC Simon Fraser 
University 
MA in Counselling 
Psychology 
No Counselling 
Psychology 
BC Trinity Western 
University 
MA in Counselling 
Psychology 
No Counselling 
Psychology 

Response: 

Most learners in BC who seek expressive arts therapies training either attend the Vancouver Art 
Therapy Institute (with its laddered MA program through Athabasca) or travel to Seattle to attend 
Antioch University’s MA program. Many learners in BC are currently pursuing these options. Both of 
these schools have endorsed Kwantlen’s IDA program. 

Additionally, Expressive Arts Therapies and Art Therapy are not the same as Counseling. The 
distinction between them is similar to the distinction between geology and geography. 


Appendices 


62 


What are the costs of the graduate programs in Art Therapy (given they are only offered in 
private institutions in BC) vis-à-vis the earning potential of the graduates? 

Response: 
Costs vary somewhat, but are consistent with typical graduate school expenses. 



Appendices 


Associations and Other Sources of Interest 

Arts and Culture Organizations and Associations 

Canadian Conference of the Arts: The Voice of Canadian Arts and Culture 
Cultural Human Resources Council 
Ministry of Small Business, Tourism and Culture 
British Columbia Arts Council 
British Columbia Association of Magazine Publishers (BCAMP) 

Art Therapy Associations 

International Expressive Arts Therapy Association (IEATA) 
Canadian Art Therapy Association 
American Art Therapy Association 
British Columbia Art Therapy Association 
Ontario Art Therapy Association 
Quebec Art Therapy Association 
BC Association of Play Therapy 


Other Sources of Interest 

Arts Research Monitor powered by Hill Strategies Research Inc. 
Hill Strategies Research Inc. 



Appendices 


64 


Books and Conference Proceedings 

Sharing the Vision: National Symposium on Arts Education (July 2001) 
A National Framework for Arts Education in Canadian Schools developed by the National 
Symposium on Arts Education. 
Source: Canadian Conference of the Arts 
http://www.ccarts.ca/en/advocacy/publications/policy/index.html#artseducation 
(Paid publication: Members $10.00/ Non-members $14.00) 


Integrated Studies: Reinventing Undergraduate Education by Tami S. Carmichael (Excerpt 
attached) 
Source: New Forums Press 
http://www.newforums.com/Store/Book_contents.asp? 
numberpage=1&images=on&display=full&category=&searchstr=20040105&search"eld=itemid 
(Paid publication: US $19.9). 



