
Hi Romy;

Congratulations on your appointment to Associate Dean. You must be (deservedly) proud of this achievement, and I look forward to working with you on various projects.

In looking at the description of your portfolio that Diane sent around the other day, I can see a number of ways in which you will likely be involved with IDEA. Themes such as student recruitment and retention, innovative and applied teaching, and curriculum development are all core to the IDEA initiative. So, I thought I would send you a note about IDEA, just to bring you up to speed about projects that are currently underway.

As you know, IDEA is not a department. Rather, it is a consortium of many different people and projects across Kwantlen. At the moment, roughly 25 people are involved with IDEA. The ad hoc development group consists of Jane Fee, Diane Purvey, Diane Naugler, Farhad Dastur, Josh Mitchell, Kurt Penner, and Meg Goodine. These are the folks who help shepherd IDEA projects from concept to implementation. The faculty members who teach IDEA courses are myself and Sean Park. This informal arrangement of colleagues is intentional: such a configuration allows IDEA to be agile, flexible, and responsive. At the same time, this means that some of the regular pathways of communication are somewhat different (IDEA is not at Faculty Council, for example). In the absence of those pathways, I send regular updates to the Deans. So, you could view this message as your first "IDEA update." You will receive at least one every semester.

With regard to the Faculty of Arts in particular, IDEA has been working extensively with Diane Purvey, Diane Naugler, and Farhad Dastur. These colleagues are very knowledgeable about IDEA and have been involved in many ways. I imagine that some of what Farhad has been doing will now become part of your portfolio.

You can learn a bit more about IDEA by visiting the IDEA page:

http://kwantlen.ca/idea

Also, here is a short list of some IDEA projects that are either underway or in development.

1. IDEA courses have earned a reputation for helping students increase their academic achievement and deepen their personal development. For example, IDEA represents .4 percent of the courses within the Faculty of Arts, yet in 2012 almost 20 percent of the students on the Dean's Honour Roll were IDEA students. The winner of the Dean's Medal was also an IDEA student. As a result of this performance (which is consistent across semesters), IDEA has been asked by various academic administrators to help develop programming for student engagement and transitions. We are working with Jane Fee, Ron Maggiore, Lyn Benn, and others on a broad plan for integrating the approaches and values of IDEA into areas such as the Learning Centre. We have also been talking about curriculum for transitions, which will involve the Faculty of Arts as a whole and which, as I understand it from Jane and Ron, will get underway this semester.

2. IDEA works across the Faculties on various interesting projects. We have just finalized plans for the Amazon field school, which is a collaboration between the Faculty of Arts and the Faculty of Design. The curriculum for the field school is offered in the Faculty of Arts (as IDEA 3100), and the infrastructure is offered by the Faculty of Design. Over the coming year we will be continuing to work with George Verghese and Carolyn Robertson to build upon our success with ideas for the new School of Design. George and Carolyn are very supportive of IDEA and have shown great enthusiasm for future developments along these lines.

3. Lyn Benn has asked us to be involved in re-shaping some of the programming offered by the Learning Centre. Sean and I will be meeting with her over the coming weeks to discuss ways of integrating the kinds of values we hold in IDEA with the services offered at the Learning Centre. This project arises from the simple fact that students consistently report that IDEA courses help them to be more purposeful and engaged in their academic and personal development. I am confident that our work with Lyn will yield excellent benefits for student recruitment and retention. Our recruitment and retention in IDEA is very strong: IDEA courses typically fill to 100%, and almost all students who take one IDEA course take another. (Keep in mind that IDEA courses are not required for any credential and the IDEA program does not offer a credential. So, all of our enrolment is voluntary and student-driven.)

4. We are working with Elizabeth Worobec and the Faculty of Science on two new initiatives: transitions curriculum for Science students and a new IDEA course on Ecology and the Arts. These initiatives are both curricular in nature and have the same character as our work on the Amazon field school: they are cross-faculty projects that integrate different partners and programs into an integrated, innovative offering. Our projects with the Faculty of Science are just getting underway (we're meeting with Elizabeth Worobec next week), and I will update you as the curricular aspects of this get underway. (With the Amazon field school, initial discussions were held between IDEA and Faculty of Design, then the respective Deans were invited to become involved. I imagine this new collaboration will take a similar path. I'll keep you in the loop.)

5. We've been working with Alan Davis on a new collaboration between Kwantlen and BC Campus. This arises from my work for Learning Technologies (Meg Goodine's area) in helping faculty members become more engaged with technologies for teaching and learning. The basic idea is to create a platform for web development and community engagement. Aside from IDEA, I also teach the New Media stream in Creative Writing, and I have been involved with web development for a very long time (I'm geeky...). Alan is very interested in working with BC Campus on innovative technology projects, and I am involved with technology. So, it's a good fit. I'll let you know what happens as this evolves.

6. IDEA is not formally involved in governance, as you know, but we are involved in many of the organizational development initiatives at Kwantlen. This semester we participated in groups working on Foundations of Excellence (Farhad and I are co-chairs of the Learning Committee), Scenario Planning, Strategic Planning (I am a member of the Development Group), and technology development. This work will continue in the Spring semester and is an excellent way for IDEA to have a consistent voice without having a fixed place. For example, I will be (re)writing the scenarios that will be used in the Strategic Planning process, and the work that IDEA has done on student engagement is being used as a foundational aspect of the Strategic Planning process. The summary page for that work on student engagement is here:

http://www.rosslaird.com/blog/what-students-want/ 

7. We will be completing a few curriculum updates this semester. We have a bit of housekeeping to do, to streamline course descriptions and so on, and we may bring forward a new second-year course. We already offer first, third, and fourth year courses, but so far nothing in second year. Our IDEA curriculum development process is very broadly consultative. We involve most or all of the people mentioned in this message. So, you'll be hearing from us about curriculum.

Well, I think that's about it for your first "IDEA update." I try not to make these updates too long, but the fact is, IDEA is involved in quite a number of things.

I look forward to working with you and to continuing the spirit of enthusiasm, gumption, and innovation that has been the hallmark of all the partners of IDEA.

Cheers.

Ross


