Hi Sandra;

Now that it seems the Amazon project is moving forward from a curricular point of view, I thought it might be a good idea to check with you about where we stand in terms of the actual travel. What else needs to be done, at this point, to formalize the trip? And, what do I need to do at this point?

Once we have confirmed that this project is actually going ahead, I can think of at least a dozen steps that need to be undertaken (aside from Lucie's trip). Here are a few items, each of which has multiple sub-items:

* Paperwork of various kinds (forms, contracts, travel documents)

* Promotion (events for students, posters, mailings, social media promotion, etc.)

* Liaison with Calanoa on a multitude of details

* Travel arrangements for everyone...

Not having done this before, I don't have a sense of how involved you are, typically, though I imagine that various things are required of your office.

Anyway, if this project is actually going to go ahead, there are about 40,000 things to do. And there's not much time in which to do it (students are already asking for more details, dates, costs, and so on).

All of this boils down to two things:

1. Is this a go?

2. What's the next step?

Cheers.

Ross

---

Hi Elizabeth;

Thanks for the chat the other day. It's always useful to know something about the environment and audience for a given presentation.

As promised, here is a suggested title and description for the presentation:

***

Digital Development: Finding a Balanced Approach to Technology in Education and the Family

This presentation will explore the impact of digital cultures and technologies on childhood development, family life, and education. Digital technologies are now essential features of the landscape of childhood, adolescence, and family life. The Web, gaming, digital entertainment, social networking, texting, and other technological activities now play a primary role in the lives of children, adolescents, parents, educators, and anyone who works with these groups. In turn, the developmental tasks of young people are increasingly mediated through these tools and activities. Themes such as interpersonal communication, self-esteem, self-regulation, and overall mental health are networked into online cultures and activities. Educators, parents, counsellors, and all those who work with children must be able to respond to this groundswell of change with new skills and strategies. This presentation provides a summary of those skills and strategies, a review of current research, and a suite of simple, practical tools that can assist adults in navigating -- and helping kids navigate -- the complexities of the digital landscape.

***

How does the above sound?

Cheers.

Ross
