FoE Learning Committee  meeting
October 18, 2012

Deirdre

Research, metrics, facilitating learning, transformation

Lyn

Learning support. How to define and measure success holistically?
What are student getting out, and what are they putting in?
Strong students as well as struggling students.
How do we measure need?
How do we serve students with disabilites.
How do we support soft skills?

Meg

Relevance of learning to life.
Use of technology (eg MOOC).
The divide between students (with tech) and institutions (with tech).
Valuing experimentation.
Sense of personal connection and knowing instructors as scholars.
Importance of openness and seeing how scholarly activity looks in the real world.

Helen

Caring about what happens in the classroom.
Importance of student development.
Helping students find a new commitment to themselves and their learning.
Making learning attractive, fun, and meaningful.
The quality of learning that we offer for students to engage in.
How do we encourage and promote engagement?
How do we help students feel that the instructor is on their side?

Teresa

Orientation of students for the full year.

Mark

How to help students with life pressures and a sense of how to "finx" problems.
How to turn students on to learning?
How to support students (better)?

Faith

Transitions: what makes a difference?
How to help people to be curious about a scholarly disposition?
Helping students to know themselves.
Helping develop communities of practice for firsts-year students.

Farhad

Professional development for faculty.
How is teaching being informed by best practices in teaching?
Brain-based learning approaches.
How to support new faculty with experimentation and innovation?
How to help faculty who are disengaged or suffering from a loss of purpose?
How do we do learning/teaching, and how do we do it better?
Importance of mentorship.
Not just about the first year. Retention and engagement across the institution and at every level.
Focus on the stuff we can change.


