Kwantlen is British Columbia's Polytechnic University. The integration of the terms Polytechnic and University in our title reflects our unique mandate, mission, and character as a post-secondary institution. Poly is a Greek word meaning many or much. Technic is also Greek, and refers to art (including the arts of science). University is a Roman word meaning all together, or whole.

Many arts and sciences comprising one whole. This is how we have been defined, and who we are becoming.

With our new university status as a foundation, the Kwantlen community intends to strengthen its leadership in polytechnic education. This entails a greater integration of career preparation with learning in the arts and sciences. One of the pillars of our emerging mission and mandate is to increase, "over the next five years, our program offerings" to be "increasingly consistent with our polytechnic mandate."

This program proposal, for a Bachelor of Arts in Interdisciplinary Arts and Culture, embodies the core values and vision of Kwantlen's emerging identity. The proposed degree will prepare learners to be competitive in a rapidly changing world and will empower them to pursue professional and career opportunities as well as graduate and professional education. The degree will provide broad learning experiences that facilitate critical awareness, cultural sensitivity, social responsibility, civic engagement, and global citizenship. Learners will be exposed to workplace experience through co-op programs, apprenticeships, service learning, internships, and a comprehensive mentorship program that will begin before their first day at Kwantlen.

The BA in Interdisciplinary Arts and Culture will offer educational opportunities accessible to a range of learners, from adult education to trades to graduate level degrees. Through strategic parternships between Interdisciplinary Arts and Culture, Academic and Career Preparation, Trades and Technology, and oher stakeholders at Kwantlen, learners in the degree program with diverse backgrounds will be able to choose educational pathways and flexible services and delivery methods to best suit their needs. Transitions programs, multiple entry points, and bridging opportunities will reflect Kwantlen's commitment to accessible, polytechnic, university-based lifelong learning. Learners in the BA in Interdisciplinary Arts and Culture will possess a clear sense of ownership of their learning, which in turn will nurture their leadership skills and civic responsibility. All members of the degree community will support a learning environment that maximizes learner success and fosters a continuing relationship with Kwantlen.

The instructional philosophy of the degree will recognize the pivotal role that the Kwantlen community will play in supporting learners to develop their values, direction, and fundamental character. Personal, academic, and professional development will be integrated. Approaches to teaching will be based on foundational principles of mentorship, humility, discovery, purposefulness, and learner autonomy. Faculty will demonstrate an authentic spirit of inquiry and model this for learners. In turn, learners will be supported in diverse modes of inquiry by a teaching environment that is collaborative, innovative, creative and respectful. Emerging and experimental teaching methods and research-driven pedagogy will be embraced. The degree program will provide a dynamic community of inquiry that is learner-focused, innovative, interdisciplinary, and socially and culturally responsible. Learner engagement will extend beyond the classroom to encompass community and industry partners and peers.

The BA in Interdisciplinary Arts and Culture will embody Kwantlen's vision to be an innovative and outstanding Polytechnic University that provides a balance of pure, practical and applied educational experiences to learners from diverse backgrounds. By integrating theory with practice, the degree will serve regional needs, reflect community values, and provide a desirable destination for those seeking an accessible and relevant learning environment. The BA in Interdisciplinary Arts and Culture will be an archetypal example of Kwantlen's diversity, inclusivity, and continued evolution.