I trust you are well, and enjoying this lovely (late) spring.

As you (may) know, I am involved with Kwantlen Polytechnic University, which is undergoing a period of rapid growth and evolution. One of the initiatives I'm involved with at Kwantlen is the development of a new degree, unique to BC, that integrates arts, culture, and media. This new BA degree will allow students to take courses across a very wide spectrum in fine and visual arts, creative writing, music, business, design, psychology, anthropology, and other fields. Students graduating from this degree program will possess a much wider range of knowledge and experience than if they had taken a traditional degree program. The program will also have a practicum, so students will get direct work experience in art, media, and culture before they graduate.

This degree program is designed to prepare students to work in arts, culture, and media environments that are, in today's marketplace, tremendously interdisciplinary and diverse. The degree will prepare students for these environments in a way that has not been done before in BC. It's a unique, innovative program (and is called, by the way, the BA in Interdisciplinary Arts).

As someone who works in an interdisciplinary field, you know very well how important it is for career-minded students to be familiar with more than Shakespeare (just to pick on English degrees for a moment, which are the traditional routes for these types of students). In this new degree program, students will learn about Shakespeare, but they will also know how to write for media, how to understand the complexities of pop culture, how to communicate effectively in a multicultural context. They will have studied art history, psychology, music, and many other fields from which they will bring considerable knowledge of the interconnectedness of things. They will, in short, be interesting people.

Here's the part where I ask you for a favour: If you think that this degree program sounds interesting, and will be useful as a new educational paradigm in BC, please let me know. We (that is, the development team for this degree) are asking various people we know to write a paragraph of support. Even a couple of sentences will do. We just want to know if you like the general idea. We're not asking for formal letters of support. We know you're busy. But if you can send back something short, that would be great. Here are a few of examples:

1. This sounds like a very innovative program. It's exactly the kind of thing we need in the post-secondary system in BC.

2. An interesting degree. I am sure it will provide greater opportunities for students to find employment in arts, media, and culture. I fully support this initiative.

3. Way cool. Can't wait to start recommending students.

If you are not as busy as I think you are, and you want to send a formal letter, I won't object. (A twelve page, double-spaced essay would be fine too. Use proper citations.)

The degree proposal enters the tricky phase of organizational review in a couple of weeks, so we'd like to get these snippets of support completed within about a week. After the review, we go to full degree development, at which point I will be happy to send you (if you want) more program documentation than will fit in the trunk of your car.

If, at this point, you have any questions, by all means get in touch and I'll try to fill you in more. Otherwise, I am curious to hear what you think of the idea.

Cheers.

Ross

--
Ross A. Laird, PhD
www.rosslaird.info
Chair, Creative Writing
Developer, Interdisciplinary Arts
Kwantlen Polytechnic University
