Endorsements:

--
Kolin:

This proposed new batchelor's degree in Interdisciplinary Arts does, at first blush, appear to be a wise response to the realities of our world in which young people are coming of age and finding their feet. For too long, I have heard that people with a B.A. feel they have invested too much of their time, energy, and life in pigeonholed learning modes and niches which do not translate practicably into the world they will need to live and work in.

...

This sounds like a winner to me. Any college really doing its homework to create a degree path like this will be finding more and more students beating a path to its door.  And, more importantly, those BA graduates of such a program will be more diversely and thoroughly "educated" (their potentials brought out) in ways more applicable to the world we're living in and that we'd like to live in.

--
Sarah Van Norman:

I am writing this letter to offer excitement and support for the proposed Bachelor of Interdisciplinary Arts at Quantlen University. As the director at the Vancouver Art Therapy Institute (VATI), I recognize the value that such a degree would have as a precursor to our graduate level diploma program.
            VATI is a recognized training facility by the Canadian Art Therapy Association, and we train art therapists using a meta-theoretical, client-centred approach. Although VATI certainly recognizes, appreciates, and utilizes the historical foundation of the Institute as being psychology-focused, and psychodynamic in approach, we contemporarily incorporate theories and approaches from a much broader paradigm. Our curriculum challenges students to advance their therapeutic values and practical approaches through different lenses. We look to anthropology, aesthetic theory, social action, and critical theory to encourage students to become more aware of themselves and their clients in the therapeutic frame. Our students see how social policy and and theory affect human beings, and whole communities through their practicum experiences.
            I think that an undergraduate degree that is designed to challenge students to think critically, with breadth, depth, and application in interdisciplinary arts is an innovative and essential development. At VATI, we look for applicants who are not only creative and intelligent, but who can also show us that they can apply their skills and knowledge in thoughtful and meaningful ways. Learning to become an art therapist is an incredibly challenging journey, and I think that this undergraduate degree would prepare students very well for the VATI program.
            On a personal note, this program looks like something that I would have wanted to take, had the opportunity existed at the time when I was graduating from high school. It took me a long time to come to the field of art therapy. I started my undergraduate degree in the sciences, because it was not clear that there were many real applications to a more creative path. Although I found academic success in the sciences, that was simply not where my passion exists. Eventually, I landed into anthropology and finally art therapy. I think that the different facets of an interdisciplinary arts program that includes so many options, including a practicum component, would have made my decision to enter an arts related undergraduate degree a much more difficult one than it was.

Sarah Van Norman
Director
Vancouver Art Therapy Institute
350-1425 Marine Drive
West Vancouver, BC
V7T 1B9

--

Margo:

The degree program as described by Dr. Laird sounds  like a very
innovative. It's exactly the kind of thing we need in the post-secondary
system in BC.  

My opinion is informed by an extensive background in human resources,
knowing many young people complete Bachelors Degrees without developing
skills needed to succeed in  the workplace.  I found this to be true
with degrees in business and social service programming and my
colleagues express similar views regarding degree programs in arts,
media and culture.  

We work with individuals planning educational and employment goals and
certainly, this is the type of programming we would encourage clients to
research and consider.  Please keep us informed as you move ahead with
this endeavour.

Margo O'Hara
Managing Director
HOPE Bridge Services
--

Jamie;

My first thought about this program was, “where was this when I needed
it”. Second thought was, “Marshall McLuhan would love this”. Working
across government and non-profit sectors for 20 years has clearly
demonstrated, to me, the absolute necessity of being able to work from
a multidisciplinary perspective.

Our world is becoming more connected and that means diversity abounds.
People entering the workforce unable to see, hear, feel and interpret
information presented in multiple modes will and do struggle to keep
up. Those with a varied knowledge base able to work from multiple
perspectives will and do thrive. They bring added value to employers
and have the advantage of being able to cross employment divides that
so often box in the “experts”.

Jamie Billingham
HIV-AIDS Prevention Coordinator
Addictions Counsellor
Chilliwack Addiction & Prevention Services
Pacific Community Resources Society

--

Student:

I was first introduced to the Interdisciplinary Expressive Arts course at Kwantlen Polytechnic University by a student who had recently taken the course. Being a Psychiatric Nursing student, I was very interested in learning more about a course that promotes such creative expression and personal exploration. I have witnessed both in psychiatric settings, and through personal experience, the many therapeutic benefits of expanding one’s creative side through several outlets, be it music, fine arts, photography, or writing, and this course seems to promote just that. Upon graduation I hope my practice will involve working with youth while incorporating the creative and therapeutic interventions I will have learned through IDEA 3100.

--
Marc Ayotte


I find this program at Kwantlen Polytechnic University to be very intriguing and I know that a lot of our students would be keen to pursue such a diverse and pragmatic course. We encourage our students to explore a number of different disciplines at Southridge and try to make links between the core themes and competencies. This program would be a natural extension of that.

--
Student:

It's exciting to hear that Kwantlen is considering an
Interdisciplinary Arts BA program. I hope that I'm not too far along
in my studies to be able to take advantage of it. I think it would
definitely be a practical and valuable program for anyone to take.
After all, the line between disciplines blur in the real world.

As an artist and a writer, I believe an interdisciplinary degree would
be especially useful since I've discovered that these practices are
not only about craft, culture, and aesthetics, but also require
understanding in psychology, history, mythology, science – or any
other area being explored. A breadth of knowledge creates a foundation
for any kind of creative or artistic communication to be properly
received as something to be respected or valued. The key is to figure
out how they all bridge together in a practical way. So I'm especially
interested in the practicum component. Theory alone can't teach what
experience has to offer.

I probably sound like I'm preaching to the converted. It's not that I
know better. I don't. But I've also got a fair amount of life
experience and tend to observe and analyze the world. For example,
look at the film industry. I often think how diverse the knowledge
base must be for those producing a film. The stories we see on the big
screen involve such a plethora of resources to make them come alive
for the viewer. I've always been fascinated and in awe by these
complex ideas. I realize large groups of people with different
expertise work together on movie productions. Yet someone has to have
a vision for the finished product. Someone needs to have at least a
basic yet vast knowledge base of all the parts required for making it
complete. Interdisciplinary work is being able to look at the big
picture. I believe an interdisciplinary degree will help create
leaders.

Well I hope I haven't gone overboard with sharing my feelings on how
beneficial I think this degree would be. I also hope I'm not sharing
my thoughts with you too late. It seems to me it would be a truly
holistic approach to learning. Thanks for letting me know of it's
possibility and best of luck for making it happen. I also hope some of
these thoughts from a student's point of view will be helpful.
--

