Institutional Context for Mission and Mandate Development

Kwantlen Polytechnic University (KPU) is a public university with responsibility for providing accessible post-secondary education to the people of the Fraser region and British Columbia. Although KPU serves several regional communities, the University is committed to enhancing its reputation across Canada and internationally. KPU actively recruits Canadian as well as international learners and prepares them to live and work in an increasingly global context.

KPU has evolved continually over its twenty-eight year history: first as a campus of Douglas College, then as Kwantlen College and Kwantlen University College. KPU will continue to honour the values and traditions of its past in fulfilling its aspirations to be a distinctive, creative, and innovative university.

As a Polytechnic University, Kwantlen aspires to broaden learning opportunities for its learners in a manner that repositions the University in relation to other post-secondary institutions in British Columbia and across Canada. A mandate that articulates the University's specific intentions is fundamental to this positioning. KPU’s mandate provides a context for future planning and will assist the University in allocating its resources. 

Planning is an iterative process. The two governing bodies of the University — the Senate and the Board of Governors — provide leadership for this process, for which principles of academic freedom, transparency and collegiality are foundational. 

--

Mission

--

Kwantlen is an innovative Polytechnic University that integrates practical and applied educational experiences with theoretical perspectives drawn from broad-based liberal arts and sciences education. Kwantlen Polytechnic University (KPU) is a desirable destination for learners with diverse backgrounds, interests, and abilities who seek a relevant, engaging, and inclusive environment that facilitates personal and professional development. KPU responds to community, regional, industry, and market needs through a distinctive variety of programs, research initiatives, and community partnerships that prepare graduates for employment, further study, and global citizenship. United by collegiality, purpose, leadership, and a unique vision for a promising future, Kwantlen is British Columbia’s Polytechnic University.

--

Mandate

--

Learning Environment

KPU nurtures personal commitment, leadership skills, and community responsibility. Learners examine and develop their values, goals, and character through the integration of personal, academic, and professional inquiry. [KPU provides broad learning experiences that facilitate critical awareness and critical thinking skills, cultural sensitivity, social responsibility, civic engagement, and] [global citizenship.] [KPU's learning environment encourages lifelong learning and fosters a continuing relationship with the University.]

KPU responds to community, industry, and market needs by preparing learners to be competitive in a rapidly changing world. The University empowers learners to pursue career opportunities as well as graduate, professional, and international education. 

KPU exposes learners to workplace experience through co-op programs, apprenticeships, service learning, internships, mentorship programs, and other forms of practica. Through continuing education, the University provides further educational opportunities for those seeking career change or development. 

KPU values all learning and offers flexible services and delivery methods for learners to choose educational pathways that best suit their needs. Transitions programs, multiple entry points, and bridging opportunities demonstrate the University's commitment to accessible lifelong learning across a broad range of educational options, from preparatory and vocational programs to graduate degrees.

Teaching at KPU is based on foundational principles of mentorship, humility, discovery, purposefulness, and learner autonomy. Faculty demonstrate an authentic spirit of inquiry intended as a model for learners. In turn, learners engage with a teaching environment that is collaborative, innovative, creative, and respectful. The University embraces emerging and experimental teaching methods and research-driven pedagogy in support of a dynamic educational community that is learner-focused, innovative, interdisciplinary, and socially and culturally responsible. At KPU, learner engagement extends beyond the classroom to encompass community, industry, and educational partners and peers. 

Knowledge Generation and Innovation

KPU encourages knowledge generation across diverse fields. The University supports multiple approaches to research and innovation to address community, industry, and market needs, including those focused on discovery, creativity, application, and teaching. KPU honours and rewards scholarship that involves learners and the broader community in research design, development, and dissemination.

KPU recognizes and responds to challenges and opportunities within the dynamic communities of the Fraser region of British Columbia. The University provides leadership by developing and supporting community-based initiatives that address economic, social, and cultural issues within an increasingly global context. In order to meet these responsibilities, KPU provides a wide range of services, facilities, and resources for its communities.

University Culture

KPU is committed to critical inquiry, collegial debate, knowledge generation, and freedom of expression. The University respects the academic freedom of students, faculty, and staff as foundational to the pursuit of knowledge. KPU recognizes that all members of the university community are responsible for exercising their freedoms with honesty and integrity.

KPU is a responsible environmental steward and is committed to being a leader in conservation and sustainability. Through program delivery and research initiatives, the University aspires to inform and transform attitudes and values to reflect its role as a socially responsible and environmentally sustainable educational institution.

KPU's evolving cultures, traditions, and campus environments support an organizational identity built upon a strong foundation of respect for diversity. Synergies among various groups are developed and sustained through complementary cultures and practices that encourage autonomy, adaptability, collegiality, service, and excellence. Members of the University community are committed to a shared vision broad enough to include, respect, and value everyone.


__

New paragraph

Kwantlen's unique history integrates college, trades, and university experiences. Our unique character, as British Columbia’s Polytechnic University, encompasses many arts and sciences working together as a unified whole. And our unique mission, as a leader in innovative and interdisciplinary education, is to offer both access and excellence in equal measure.

Formatting: Who We Are, What We Do
