All proposals asssessed agaainst the folloowing criteriia:

Degree to which professional development, performance expertise, and/or career
plans of the applicant(s) are enhanced.

Degree to which the proposal is related to the applicant’s work at Kwantlen
Polytechnic University including benefits to the applicant, the institution and
students.

Institutional priorities will be considered in the assessment of all proposals. Such priorities will assist faculty to remain current and active in their discipline and program. Priorities will be included in the communication calling for proposals.

Communication: Applications involving research, conference presentations, enhancing teaching and learning as well as support for tuition are some areas considered for funding.


All applications must include a letter of recommendation from the appropriate Dean. The
minimum award will be $1,000. Significant applications are encouraged. Up to one year time release may be approved, in exceptional circumstances.

For applications up to $20,000, two letters of reference from faculty colleagues are
required. For applications over $20,000, an additional external letter of reference is
required.

For applications involving degree completion or equivalent, evidence is required that the
applicant has made demonstrable efforts to obtain funding through the host institution.
Should an applicant funded for full-time time release receive a grant, bursary, stipend,
salary or other award, Kwantlen will reduce the allocation from this fund so that the total monies received by the faculty member equal the faculty member’s full-time salary.
Faculty members receiving funds are expected to continue their employment at Kwantlen
Polytechnic University. If they resign, the funds will be recovered as follows:

Full recovery if subsequent service is one year or less.
Fifty percent recovery if subsequent service is two years or less, but greater than 1
year.

Within 2 months of completion of any activity funded through this process, the faculty
member must submit a report demonstrating the extent to which proposed outcomes were
achieved to the Senior Administrators and to their Dean.
