A very interesting, entertaining, and thoughtful piece. I appreciated the color and mood of it. Also, the personal character of the narrative resonates well, so that the reader gets a strong sense of who you are. This is an essential feature of good nonfiction writing. Overall, this piece is a good effort, and is well done.

A couple of suggestions:

1. Keep working on tightening. Look for extra words and different ways of expressing ideas. At the moment, you sometimes use words and phrases that are closer to speech than writing. And while this is OK sometimes (especially if the mood or tone of the piece is verbal or conversational), it's usually a sign that you've left a sentence before it has been worked fully. To work a sentence fully, spend some time removing extra words (all of them!), playing with the phrase order, and considering alternate vocabulary (ideally, more effective or expressive vocabulary).

2. Also with regard to tightening: try to insert a few more small punctuating sentences here and there, to focus the reader on small but important themes or images. Essentially, you want the reader to be led through the narrative effortlessly, as though a path just opens up. You don't want a narrative that explains many things, or describes scenes with many long and involved sentences. You (and the reader) want the narrative to run, and this depends on the writer being attentive to the flow and rhythm of the words. That rhythm should be sprightly.

3. Read your work aloud (at least twice), in a voice that is strong and clear. Do this with each sentence and paragraph. This helps a great deal with rhythm. Read aloud as though you are announcing the birth of a new world (which you are).

4. Try to use precise vocabulary in descriptions. Every time you use an adjective, or an adverb, ask yourself if there is a more precise way to express the image you are trying to convey. (This is related to the general theme of Show, Don't Tell.) Only use descriptions when absolutely necessary (like, say, describing the colors of a bird). In all other cases, try to show details incidentally, in the flow of the narrative, and incrementally, as the narrative unfolds. Give yourself a rule: one sentence of description for even five paragraphs of story.

5. Think about verb tenses, particularly the present tense. The present moment is all there is (in life), and is perhaps where we should be (in art). 

Keep going. You are doing well.
