This project is a good start: you made a commitment to a creative process, you spent time working, and you did some self-reflection. As a basic framework for moving forward, this project is fine. What I'd like to see you do is expand and deepen this type of approach, by paying particular attention to the themes and criteria listed on pages 10 and 11 of the course outline. If you have misplaced the outline, you can retrieve it from here:

http://rosslaird.com/static/media/uploads/3100.pdf

In particular, I'd like to see you read some more for the next project. Your research could be a little deeper and more thorough. Find some books and/or articles that reflect scholarly thinking about your subject, and use those readings to reflect more deeply about your process. If you need help finding readings, just ask me.

The main thing is to move forward through a blend of joyfulness and challenge. You seem to be doing that. Keep going.

Also, you did not send me a suggested grade. Take a look at the course outline and the criteria for assignments and assessment (pages 10 and 11). Notice the text on page 10 that says "What grade would you give yourself?" This is an important part of the self-assessment. I am interested in you developing the skill of self-evaluation, and many of the bullet points on page 10 are designed to help you practice that skill. My evaluation of your project will be based, in part, on your evaluation -- including what grade you would assign to your project. Feel free to add more self-reflection when you send along your suggested grade.

Once I have received your suggested grade, I will send a further narrative evaluation along with a grade. It will either be the same or different than the grade you have suggested. If it's different I'll tell you why. Then, I'd like you to respond to my assessment, by sending me an email with your thoughts about my assessment. This way, the assessment becomes conversational and process-oriented.

You don't have to respond to my assessment. You can just get the grade for this project and move on to the next project. However, if you choose that approach, I will respond to your next assignment with the grade only: no narrative assessment. You can see what I'm working toward here: engagement with the process. The more you engage, the more you get back. So, ideally I'd like to see you respond to my assessment of each of your projects. That way you will get the most amount of feedback on your projects and I will get the most amount of feedback about your process. Everybody wins. Again, this part is entirely optional. If you just want a grade for each of the projects, that's what you will get. Whatever works best for you.

For now, just take a look at the outline and send along a suggested grade, and more reflection if you like.

Cheers.

Ross
