Hi;

Before I send along my assessment of your first project (which looks interesting and purposeful), take a look at the course outline and the criteria for assignments and assessment (pages 10 and 11). Notice the text on page 10 that says "What grade would you give yourself?" This is an important part of the self-assessment. I am interested in you developing the skill of self-evaluation, and many of the bullet points on page 10 are designed to help you practice that skill. My evaluation of your project will be based, in part, on your evaluation -- including what grade you would assign to your project.

So, what I'd like you to do is look at the points on page 10 of the outline (if you haven't already done so), consider your work on this project in light of those points, and email me a suggested grade along with answers to those questions. If you have lost the outline, you can download it again via this link:

http://rosslaird.com/static/media/uploads/3100.pdf

If you have further questions, please send them along. Once I have received your responses, I will send a further narrative evaluation along with a grade. It will either be the same or different than the grade you have suggested. If it's different I'll tell you why. Then, I'd like you to respond to my assessment, by sending me an email with your thoughts about my assessment. This way, the assessment becomes conversational and process-oriented.

Now, you don't have to respond to my assessment. You can just get the grade for this project and move on to the next project. However, if you choose that approach, I will respond to your next assignment with the grade only: no narrative assessment. You can see what I'm working toward here: engagement with the process. The more you engage, the more you get back. So, ideally I'd like to see you respond to my assessment of each of your projects. That way you will get the most amount of feedback on your projects and I will get the most amount of feedback about your process. Everybody wins. Again, this part is entirely optional. If you just want a grade for each of the projects, that's what you will get. Whatever works best for you.

For now, take a look at pages 10 and 11 of the outline and send me whatever is missing from those questions and criteria.

Cheers.

Ross




