

Hi Alan;

First let me extend a warm welcome to Kwantlen. It's an interesting place, and I'm sure you are already discovering our many diversities and quirks. Empire State College and Kwantlen are similar in some respects, and that's partly why I'm getting in touch. I was very heartened to see that you had come to Kwantlen by way of an institution (ESC) so deeply rooted in the values and practices of individualized and nontraditional teaching and learning. These values are foundational to Kwantlen's Interdisciplinary Expressive Arts (IDEA) program -- which, in fact, is not a program at all but a set of courses founded upon one big idea: the renewal and reinvention of post-secondary education.

IDEA belongs to no department and offers no credential (though we are working on one). Our Kwantlen cohort includes one regular faculty member and the Deans of Arts (we are in the process of hiring a second faculty member). IDEA is small, very small. But behind this tiny formal role lies a wider cohort of innovative educators keen to work together to build a consortium across institutions (as I said, big ideas). Our current search process for the second faculty member has met with great enthusiasm from many of the leading innovative and interdisciplinary educators on the local scene. IDEA has created quite a bit of buzz, and many people want to join us. We will try to bring these folks to Kwantlen one at a time, as IDEA expands.

In some ways, we are creating a Canadian version of the the Union for Experimenting Colleges and Universities, which had its roots in the sixties and the culture of educational renewal that led to the Union Institute and Empire State College. But the entire spectrum of educational services is now seeing a vast reinvigoration of these ideas: in places such as Stanford's d.school, where students work in makerspaces and hackerspaces alongside faculty and community partners who provide mentorship and support; in high schools based on environmental principles and holding classes in nature; in adult learning environments that leverage technology in purposeful and effective ways. The IDEA cohort is involved in all of these conversations and our learning environment is built using these kinds of practices. Integrative teaching and learning, supported by new technologies, driven by community focus and personal initiative: these are the kinds of things we do.

You are, no doubt, learning all about Kwantlen by way of attending many meetings of departments, programs, and Faculty Councils. But, as IDEA has no formal role in any of those places, one of the only ways for you to learn about IDEA is for me to tell you about it. So, I thought I would do that. You can also talk to Jane Fee, or any of the Deans in the Faculty of Arts, to learn a bit more. Jane and the Arts Deans have been wonderfully positive about IDEA and have provided much necessary support.

I have attached a few testimonials from IDEA students. I couldn't help it; I'm proud of the impact IDEA courses have on students. I can also send you more information if you like. And, if you want to discuss any of this in person, please feel free to get in touch.

Oh, and one more thing: I also teach in the Creative Writing department, so if you want to do a project on playwriting and creativity, just let know. That would be fun.

Cheers.

Ross Laird
rosslaird.com


