
Expressive arts therapies include various interdisciplinary approaches to psychology and social services. Typically, the following disciplines define themselves as expressive arts therapies:

Art therapy
Photo therapy (sometimes defined as a branch of art therapy)
Music therapy
Creative writing therapy (bibliotherapy)
Poetry therapy (a branch of bibliotherapy)
Dance and movement therapy
Therapeutic theatre (known as Psychodrama)
Play therapy

Taken together, these approaches represent some of the oldest and most well-established modalities within the helping professions. Interest in expressive arts therapies is increasing over time (for both demographic and cultural reasons). Many professional counsellors seek training in mainstream psychology and at least one of the above disciplines. Current educational opportunities in BC for such training are sparse. 

No BC university offers expressive arts therapies training. Most students travel to universities in Europe or the United States where programs are well-developed; Lesley College, for example, in Cambridge, Mass. (www.lesley.edu/gsass/56etp.html). The Lesley program offers a master's degree accompanied by certification in art, dance, or music therapies. Antioch University in Seattle offers a similar program in Psychology and Art Therapy. Some Canadian students attend Concordia, which offers a program in expressive arts therapies (art and drama, with music currently in development).

The Concordia University Creative Arts Therapies program (art-therapy.concordia.ca) is the only university-sponsored expressive arts therapy program in Canada. (Langara College has recently begun to offer a limited two-year certificate, through Continuing Studies, in Expressive Arts Therapies.)

Institute-sponsored Art Therapy programs in Canada include:

Vancouver Art Therapy Institute in West Vancouver (master's degree)
British Columbia School of Art Therapy in Victoria
Kutenai Art Therapy Institute in Nelson
Toronto Art Therapy Institute in Ontario
Centre de Ressourcement par les Arts et la Nature in Sherbrooke, Quebec

Music therapy programs in Canada (bachelor's degree) include:

Acadia University in Wolfville, Nova Scotia
Canadian Mennonite University in Winnipeg, Manitoba
Capilano College in North Vancouver
Wilfrid Laurier University in Waterloo, Ontario (also offers a master's program)
University of Windsor in Ontario
Université du Québec à Montreal

In Canada, no university programs exist for dance therapy, bibliotherapy, photo therapy, psychodrama, or play therapy. Most Canadian students travel to the United States for such programs -- to California, in particular, where well-recognized and very costly programs thrive: at the Union Institute and University, the California Institute of Integral Studies, Pacifica University, the Naropa Institute, and so on. (I completed both my MA and PhD at such institutions.)

Certification in the expressive arts therapies almost always requires the completion of a master's degree or equivalent. Employment is usually contingent upon certification. In BC, the main certifying body for counsellors is the BC Association of Clinical Counsellors (BCACC). This organization certifies practitioners who possess a master's degree in Psychology or a related field (plus relevant experience). In practice, this means that expressive arts therapists (with the exception of art therapists) must also have an MA in Psychology. In the case of art therapists, certification is provided by BCATA and CATA, both of which require an MA or equivalent.

In BC, prospective students for bachelor's-level training in expressive arts therapies include:

Students considering a career in expressive arts counselling, with the MA as their terminal degree
(Typically, such students currently enrol in BA programs in Psychology, Visual Arts, Social Work, Theatre, Anthropology, Music, or English Literature)
Current practitioners (at the MA level) seeking specific training to augment existing skills
Current practitioners (at the certificate level) seeking augmentative training
Members of the general public with an interest in expressive therapies for personal or professional development



