
Ross Laird is an interdisciplinary scholar, consultant, teacher, writer, and creative artist. He works with post-secondary learners, educators, counsellors, social service providers, and many other groups on a wide variety of projects and initiatives. He is particularly interested in the foundational role of personal and group development in all aspects of human life, in the many paths and mysteries of self-awareness, and in the nature of healing. Ross is an advocate for personal health, educational renewal, and community development. He enjoys running, rock climbing, woodworking, and studying ancient cultural practices of creativity and spirituality.

Ross is the author of Grain of Truth: The Ancient Lessons of Craft, a bestseller and critically acclaimed study of creativity. He is also the recipient of the Union Institute’s Sussman Award for Academic Excellence for “ultimate academic achievement at the doctoral level.” Ross is an instructor in counselling, psychology, interdisciplinary expressive arts, new media, and creative writing. He has taught at many educational institutions, including Simon Fraser University, Vancouver Community College, Kwantlen Polytechnic University, The Union Institute and University, and Antioch University. He also provides consulting services to professional artists, writers, and graduate learners in multiple disciplines, to addictions counsellors, to social service agencies, and to corporations and educational institutions. He is a frequent speaker at conferences and in public media, is a registered member of the BC Association of Clinical Counsellors, and is the recipient of the Association’s Communications Award.

Ross lives in Vancouver, BC. He can often be found exploring the vanishing wilderness of British Columbia.


Lucie Gagné is a designer with broad experience in interior and architectural design as well as in project management. Ms Gagné joined the Interior Design Faculty at Kwantlen in August of 1998. Her primary teaching responsibilities have been focused on the Design Theories / History stream, site tutorials and field trips, and the Design Studio stream. In addition to teaching, she has been the Coordinator of the interior design program, as well as chairing and representing the program on several committees. She has also been involved in international exchanges and has conducted field study educational travel in Canada, USA, Mexico, Chile, Colombia and Turkey.
Prior to her time at Kwantlen, Ms. Gagné was a principal of the firm Carlyle Design Associates in Ottawa. She had senior responsibility for projects; requiring planning, design concept, detail development and close collaboration with client representatives. The firm worked primarily on Institutional Projects (Health Care, Government and Education), in Canada and the United States.

From June 1986 until October, 1988, Ms. Gagné was a member of the design team for the new National Gallery of Canada in Ottawa. She participated in planning, design, and installation phases for signage, design and fit-up of public, office, and gallery spaces for the new National Gallery. She also provided liaison between the Gallery, government agencies, and project consultants. Before working with the National Gallery, Ms. Gagné worked on interior and architectural design of residential housing and small buildings for several small firms.

Ms. Gagné is a professional member of the Interior Design Institute of British Columbia, and a member of the Interior Design Educators Council (IDEC). She is the outgoing President of the Alliance of Canadian Educators in Interior Design (ACEID). She is certified by the National Council for Interior Design Qualification (NCIDQ); and served on the NCIDQ Board of Directors in 1994 and 1995.

She is fluent in both spoken and written French and English. Ms. Gagné has a Bachelor of Art History and Architecture from Carleton University in Ottawa, and a Bachelor of Applied Design in Interior Design from Kwantlen University.


Sean was born and raised in Hamilton, Ontario where he grew up riding bicycles along the Niagara escarpment. He attended the inquiry-based Health Sciences program at McMaster University and graduated with local and national distinction for contributions to undergraduate education. Sean thought he would become an environmental lawyer, but dropped out of law school a few weeks into the program after an inner voice told him to take a different path. After a year working as an education research assistant at McMaster University, Sean completed his M.A. at the University of Toronto with a thesis focused on education as an ecological, self-organizing system. During his time in Toronto, Sean studied Daoist martial arts, Buddhist meditation, and played various instruments in Samba Elegua, an earth quakin’, booty shakin’, no fakin’ Afro-Brazilian street orchestra.

Sean is currently a doctoral candidate in Arts Education at Simon Fraser University. His doctoral research examines the “inner work” of educators through the practices of internal martial arts, mindfulness, therapy, performance, and group process. Sean is a dedicated practitioner of neigong and taijiquan and studies under the guidance of Sifu Lou Crockett of Blue Mountain NeiGong. He is a member of XPOD, a small research collaborative examining the lived intersection of contemplative practice and community development. Sean also loves to break it down on the mic and is an avid freestyle rapper. He lives with his wife Stephanie in East Van (represent!) and they are expecting their first child in March, 2012.

