What we think about:

Learning (and teaching) for the whole person.

Integration of personal, professional, and academic development.

Focus on creativity and interdisciplinarity.


Who else is doing this?

Quest

Stanford’s d.School

The ArtScience Lab at Harvard


How does it work?

The classroom as facilitation space.
(Small class sizes are not meaningful unless you use them.)

Class time as interaction time.

The instructor as colleague and mentor.

Student-built content within and beyond the classroom.


What does it look like?

We sit in a circle for the large group, and in small groups for everything
else.

We don't use tables unless required for a specific purpose.

Most class time is spent experientially and facilitated by learners working in
groups.

The instructor facilitates the process. Instructor lecturing is limited to short
blocks of a few minutes.

No content delivery by the instructor unless the content cannot be accessed in
other ways (by way of readings, for example).


How do we handle assignments and grading?

Learners create self-directed projects (3 per course, typically) with included
self-assessments and self-grading (using exhaustive criteria).

Instructors evaluate the projects and consult with students about self-
assessments.

No exams, no small assignments, no multiple-choice tests.

Group work in the classroom (and outside the classroom) represents at least 25
percent of a learner's grade.


How well does it work?

Learners report feeling more engaged and responsible for their work.

They report that their overall academic performance (in all courses) increases.

IDEA represents less than half of one percent of courses in the Faculty of
Arts. Yet in 2012, almost 20 percent of the learners on the Dean's Honour Roll
(including the winner of the Dean's Medal) were learners who had taken at least
one IDEA course.

They have more fun.

Instructors have more fun.


What about workload?

This approach is more work (not less): learning group facilitation and
mentorship skills, interacting with learners and their projects, rebuilding most of the
structure each semester.

But the work is more interesting and fun than what we might otherwise do
(lecture, grade, repeat).

On balance, it feels like less work, and less like work.



